Title: Quantum Simulation on Riemannian Manifolds

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2610.03673v1

Published Time: Mon, 05 Oct 2026 01:39:26 GMT

Number of Pages: 145

Markdown Content:
# Quantum Simulation on Riemannian Manifolds 

Dylan Herman *1, Jacob Watkins 1, Guneykan Ozgul 1, Jiayu Shen 1,Brandon Augustino 1, Junhyung Lyle Kim 1, and Shouvanik Chakrabarti †1 1Global Technology Applied Research, JPMorganChase, New York, NY 10001, USA October 5, 2026 

Abstract 

We investigate algorithms for the quantum simulation of the Schr ¨ odinger equation on a Riemannian manifold, where the kinetic operator is defined by the Laplace–Beltrami opera-tor corresponding to the metric. Our first algorithms are based on a global spectral method based on the identification of an efficient transform to the eigenbasis of the Laplace–Beltrami operator. We use this method to provide explicit, efficient, quantum simulation algorithms for the Riemannian Schr ¨ odinger equation on tori and spheres with their standard metrics, sim-plices with the Wright–Fisher metric, truncated positive orthants and their invertible affine images with the log-barrier Hessian metric, and ℓp balls with a metric induced by the Duffy map. Our second algorithm is based on a coherent simulation of local spectral methods on multiple charts, and is in principle applicable to any compact manifold. We first analyze this algorithm in the continuum and derive conditions under which a polynomial spectral cutoff suffices. We also provide a discretization analysis of a polynomial spectral cutoff for tensor-products of constant-dimensional manifolds. Finally, we consider applications of these meth-ods to optimization and physical simulation. For optimization, we provide results including a generalization and convergence analysis of Quantum Hamiltonian Descent for geodesically convex functions that leads to explicit algorithms on the sphere and simplex, and a Rieman-nian generalization of the Real-Space Adiabatic Algorithm. For physical simulation, we show that our algorithms can simulate certain spatially discretized field theories, including a variant of the nonlinear sigma model. 

> *

dylan.a.herman@jpmchase.com 

> †

shouvanik.chakrabarti@jpmchase.com 

1arXiv:2610.03673v1 [quant-ph] 2 Oct 2026 Contents 

1 Introduction 3

1.1 Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51.1.1 Global spectral methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71.1.2 Coherent-chart methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91.1.3 Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 1.2 Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 

2 Preliminaries and Notation 13 3 Global Spectral Methods 15 

3.1 General framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 3.2 Flat Torus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 3.3 Positive orthant (and its invertible affine images) with log-barrier metrics . . . . . . 33 3.4 ℓp balls with a Duffy metric . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37 3.5 Sphere with the standard metric . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42 3.6 Simplex with Wright–Fisher metric . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57 

4 Simulation on General Riemannian Manifolds – Coherent Chart Spectral Methods 66 

4.1 Analysis of the coherent chart algorithm in continuous space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72 4.2 Tensor products of manifolds and a discretized algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79 4.2.1 Digital Coherent-Charts Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80 4.2.2 Discretization error analysis for products of constant dimensional manifolds 83 

5 Applications 105 

5.1 Simulations of Physics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105 5.1.1 Quantum Mechanics on Curved Spaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105 5.1.2 Nonlinear Sigma Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106 5.1.3 CPN−1 Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108 5.1.4 Lattice Gauge Theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110 5.1.5 Concrete simulation of the spatially discretized O(N) nonlinear sigma model 112 5.2 Connection to quantum interior-point methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114 5.3 Riemannian Quantum Hamiltonian Descent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115 5.3.1 Additional Preliminaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115 5.3.2 Riemannian QHD over the Sphere . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 128 5.3.3 Riemannian QHD over the Simplex . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 132 5.4 Real-Space Adiabatic Algorithm on ℓp Balls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135 21 Introduction 

Quantum simulation is the paradigmatic application of quantum computers and was the primary impetus for the interest in this form of computing [Fey81]. The study of explicit algorithms for quantum simulation was initiated by Lloyd [Llo96], and over time many powerful quantum algo-rithms have been developed for the simulation of appropriately specified Hamiltonians that act on a discrete space, using techniques that include product formulae [Llo96; Chi+21], linear com-binations of unitaries [CW12; BCK15], or qubitization and quantum signal processing for block-encoded Hamiltonians [LC17; LC19; Gil+19]. There has also been significant interest in simulating Schr ¨ odinger dynamics in real space. This problem takes the schematic form 

i∂tψ(t) = H(t)ψ(t), H(t) = −a(t)∆ + b(t) f , (1) on a Hilbert space such as L2(Ω, d x), where Ω is a bounded subset of Rd. Simulating such sys-tems requires appropriate discrete representations of the continuum operators. This continuum-to-circuit passage must be an explicit part of the algorithmic analysis in real space, since the choice of discretization method, and the resulting grid spacing, basis cutoff, smoothing proce-dure, quadrature rule, and aliasing analysis can all affect the number of qubits, and the query and gate complexity. Kivlichan et al. bounded real-space simulation costs using finite-difference discretizations [Kiv+17], Childs et al. [Chi+22] gave an explicit Fourier pseudospectral framework for real-space dynamics, and Chakrabarti et al. gave a refined analysis of this method and concrete estimates for Lipschitz-continuous potentials [Cha+26]. In addition to the natural physics applications, another motivation for real-space simulation comes from quantum algorithms for continuous optimization that use quantum dynamics as the algorithmic foundation, with the objective function encoded in the potential. A systematic study of such algorithms was initiated by Leng et al. under the name “Quantum Hamiltonian De-scent” [Len+23]. Subsequently, quantum dynamical algorithms have been explored for linear pro-gramming [Aug+23a], convex optimization [CSW25; Len+25b; Cha+26; Gri+25], and non-convex optimization [LSL23; LZW23; Che+25; Len+25a; Her+25]. It is notable that in several regimes, the strongest known quantum speedups are achieved by dynamical methods rather than by more tra-ditional quantum optimization primitives. Examples include the best-known speedups for high-dimensional stochastic convex optimization [Cha+26], worst-case query speedups for constructed nonconvex optimization instances [Len+25a], and speedups over known classical algorithms for specific explicit families of nonconvex functions [Her+25]. An important generalization is that of quantum simulation over a Riemannian manifold (M, g).In this setting, the corresponding kinetic operator is not the standard Laplacian but rather the Laplace–Beltrami operator, expressed in local coordinates as, 

∆gu = ρ−1∂i



ρgij ∂ju



, where ρ(x) = 

q

det (gij (x)) , (2) where repeated coordinate indices are summed according to the Einstein summation convention. The target for simulation is now the Riemannian Schr ¨ odinger equation 

i∂tψ(t) = Hg(t)ψ(t), Hg(t) = −a(t)∆g + b(t) f , ψ(t) ∈ L2(M, d vol g) (3) where d vol g(x) = ρ(x) dx. One recovers the Euclidean case by setting g = I in local coordinates. 3Why should we care about simulating such dynamics? Physics provides a direct motivation. A particle subject to regular holonomic constraints, or a rigid rotor, has a smooth Riemannian config-uration space. Its Hamiltonian uses the corresponding Laplace–Beltrami operator for the kinetic term, potentially supplemented by a scalar-curvature term from the quantization prescription or by an extrinsic-curvature potential generated when the constraint is realized through strong confinement [DeW57; Cos81a]. These elementary examples are usually low-dimensional. For the high-dimensional setting where speedups from quantum computing are most important, the more relevant examples arise from spatially discretized field theories. A standard nonlinear sigma model with target T has lattice configuration space T|Λ|; its kinetic term is a sum of target-space Laplacians, while the spatial-gradient and on-site terms act as a multiplication potential. This includes the O(N) models with T = SN−1 and the CPN−1 models with the Fubini–Study met-ric [Bur00; Ale+19; Sin22; Eic78; dLD78]. Hamiltonian lattice gauge theory with compact gauge group G similarly has kinematic configuration space G|E | , with one factor for each lattice link; the electric term is a sum of group Laplacians, while the magnetic plaquette term is a multiplication potential [KS75; Ba ˜ n+20]. In both cases, the configuration-space dimension grows with the num-ber of lattice sites or links even when each factor has fixed dimension. On any fixed spatial lattice, these Hamiltonians are therefore exact instances of the Riemannian Schr ¨ odinger equation above. A second motivation for non-Euclidean geometry comes from classical optimization, where geometry can be part of both the problem and the algorithm. Constrained optimization is a cen-tral example. When equality constraints define a smooth feasible manifold, Riemannian meth-ods use tangent directions and retractions to preserve feasibility. Spheres, Stiefel and Grassmann manifolds, and fixed-rank matrix manifolds are typical cases [Bou23]. More broadly, mirror de-scent [NY83; Bub15] replaces Euclidean geometry with the Bregman geometry of a chosen mirror map, which can be selected to reflect problem structure; negative entropy on the probability sim-plex is a canonical example [BT03]. In interior-point methods, the geometry induced by the Hes-sian of a self-concordant barrier is more fundamental still: it determines the local norm in which the Newton direction is defined, its unit ball is a Dikin ellipsoid contained in the feasible region, and self-concordance controls how quickly this geometry changes from one point to the next. These properties allow Newton steps to track the central path and underlie the polynomial iteration bounds for path-following methods [NN94; Ren01]. Non-Euclidean geometry plays many important roles beyond enforcing constraints. Natural-gradient and related methods use a position-dependent metric as a preconditioner to reduce sensitivity to parametrization and anisotropic scaling [Ama98]; when the objective is geodesi-cally convex, the chosen geometry can additionally support global first-order convergence guar-antees [ZS16]. Thus non-Euclidean geometry can encode feasibility, exploit symmetry, and im-prove conditioning. Geometry also plays an algorithmic role in sampling, which in turn under-lies simulated-annealing methods for convex optimization and algorithms for volume compu-tation [AH16; BK22]. Riemannian Hamiltonian Monte Carlo adapts its trajectories to the local scaling and correlation structure of a target distribution, and has led to improved worst-case mix-ing bounds and faster volume algorithms for polytopes [GC11; LV22; LV18], as well as practical gains on high-dimensional, ill-conditioned problems [Koo+22]. The quantum-dynamical speedups for convex and nonconvex optimization highlighted earlier concern unconstrained problems: the dynamics uses a Euclidean kinetic operator and encodes the objective in the potential [Cha+26; Len+25a; Her+25]. To extend this approach to constrained optimization while preserving feasibility by construction, the kinetic evolution must also respect 4the feasible set. For a smooth feasible manifold (M, g), this means replacing −∆ by −∆g; for an inequality-constrained domain, a barrier-induced metric can similarly encode the geometry of its interior. Gribling, Apers, Nieuwboer, and Walter [Gri+25] make this connection explicit for a self-concordant barrier Φ: they equip the feasible domain with the Hessian metric g = ∇2Φ

and study central-path Schr ¨ odinger operators built from −∆g. They prove spectral-gap bounds without the Euclidean condition-number dependence and, under assumptions that include access to the corresponding Riemannian evolution, use these bounds to formulate a quantum interior-point method. Efficient digital simulation of Riemannian Schr ¨ odinger dynamics is therefore a concrete primitive for extending quantum-dynamical optimization to constrained problems. Finally, we note that the simulation of (3) is generally understood to be significantly more complicated than that of simulating that standard real-space dynamics. In flat real-space simu-lation, the Fourier transform gives a global basis in which the kinetic energy is simple, while a position grid gives a representation in which the potential is simple. For a general manifold, such a transform requires an efficiently implementable map to the eigenbasis of the Laplace–Beltrami operator, and simulation requires us to both identify such a map and develop an efficient quan-tum algorithm for the transform. All the nuances of the discretization analysis in the flat space must also be handled again, and this analysis may in general be more complicated. The situation is even more complex for a general manifold: there may be no single global coordinate chart, no efficiently implementable transform to Laplace–Beltrami eigenfunctions, and no uniform volume form. In such cases, one can hope to use local methods where Euclidean simulation methods ap-ply for each local chart, however this brings additional difficulties: Local charts may overlap and amplitudes on overlaps must be recombined coherently rather than treated as independent clas-sical alternatives. Additionally, the continuum-to-circuit passage causes inconsistencies among different charts. As a consequence, the simulation of Riemannian Schr ¨ odinger operators has been explicitly left open by papers such as [Gri+25]. The main goal of this paper is to make the first substantial algorithmic progress towards resolving this question. 

1.1 Results 

Our main results make a systematic analysis of simulation algorithms for Riemannian Schr ¨ odinger equations. In (3), the Hamiltonian contains differential and multiplication operators acting on wavefunction ψ(t) defined continuously on M. A digital algorithm must first choose a finite rep-resentation of the wavefunction and a finite matrix representing these operators. The analogous problem on a periodic Euclidean domain is handled by the Fourier pseudospectral method. One truncates the Fourier expansion of the wavefunction, uses that the Laplacian is diagonal in the Fourier basis, and applies the discrete Fourier transform to evaluate the potential on a finite set of quadrature nodes. Since the digital evolution does not need to agree with the continuous evo-lution, a rigorous pseudospectral method provides an error guarantee for a chosen Fourier cutoff and the quadrature rule that determine the space in which digital evolution takes place and how accurately the potential is represented respectively. 

Global Spectral Methods. On a Riemannian manifold, the pseduospectral method can be ex-tended by forming an analogous basis using the eigenfunctions of the Laplace–Beltrami operator. We call this approach global spectral method where one relies on a single global transform encod-ing the geometry of the manifold. This approach becomes viable when one is be able implement 5this basis transform and approximate the potential in this transformed space using the quadra-ture rules. Similar to the Euclidean case, one needs to determine the right cutoff threshold for the spectral degree and the quadrature rules to provide a rigorous simulation guarantee. The main additional issue is that in Euclidean case, multiplication by a function with maximum spectral degree K, increases the degree of the wavefunction by at most K. This does not hold for gen-eral manifolds, however for the manifolds considered in this paper, each such multiplication can increase spectral degree by only a controlled amount due to slow spectral growth property. Using the global spectral method, we give end-to-end digital simulation algorithms with rigor-ous guarantee for several important settings. These include flat torus, the sphere with its standard metric, and the simplex with the Wright–Fisher metric. We also obtain algorithms for positive or-thants, affine images of such domains, and ℓp balls by reducing their chosen metrics to flat periodic problems through explicit coordinate changes. 

General Manifolds and Coherent-Chart Methods. The need for an efficiently implementable global transform and the explicit global spectral structure limits the applicability of the global spectral method. A compact manifold always has a Laplace–Beltrami eigenbasis, but this fact alone does not provide slow spectral growth, useful quadrature rules, or efficient quantum trans-forms. To address this limitation, we also introduce the coherent-chart method that does not rely on one single global basis transformation. Since a manifold resembles an Euclidean space in the near vicinity of a point, one can decompose the space into local charts and use the ordinary Fourier ex-pansion similar to the pseudospectral method for each chart. To be able to this, one first needs to provide a localization procedure that allows the wavefunction to be decomposed into local charts that can be simulated efficiently by retaining the relative phases so that it can be recombined into original global state. We give a localization procedure inspired by the well known IMS formula. The Riemannian IMS identity allows to decompose the wavefunction and the Hamiltonian into local charts and also provide the right correction term to the potential that allows the local opera-tors recombine into right global form. We give simulation guarantees for the resulting algorithm under explicit Sobolev and geometric regularity assumptions that are required to control the over-lapping regions between the local charts. The resulting approximation is controlled by a local Fourier cutoff: in each chart, only Fourier modes whose coordinate frequencies below the cut-off are retained. For general compact manifolds, we bound the difference between the exact and truncated continuum evolutions, and show that a cutoff that is polynomial in the dimension suf-fices at fixed accuracy under explicit geometric and Sobolev assumptions. For tensor products of constant-dimensional manifolds, we extend the analysis to a finite-dimensional discretization, us-ing a global interpolation space to connect the local grids, and prove a corresponding polynomial cutoff under various interpolation and regularity assumptions. We highlight that the two sets of simulation results differ in the scope of their primary con-tribution. In the case of global spectral methods, the simulation algorithm is clear as it is an extension of the pseudospectral algorithm used in flat space. Our main contribution there is to ob-tain explicit end-to-end algorithms with rigorous guarantees and resource estimates, for particular well-studied manifolds of application-specific interest. On the other hand for general manifolds, to the best of our knowledge, there did not exist an algorithmic framework that is conducive to analysis. Our contribution is to propose such a framework and determine conditions under which the truncation requirements (which are one of the main bottlenecks in the analysis of simulation algorithms) are benign. 6Table 1 summarizes the scope and status of the results. The following subsections give a more detailed overview of the two simulation methods. Finally, Section 1.1.3 gives an overview of our study of applications of quantum simulation on Riemanninan manifolds, and discusses how our algorithms fit into these applications. 

Configuration space Metric Guarantee 

Flat torus Td Euclidean metric gij = δij Efficient digital simulation (Theorem 3.9). Truncated positive orthant and its invertible affine images 

g = AT diag (( Ax − c)−2 

> i

)A, with 

A = I and c = 0 for the orthant Efficient digital simulation (Theorem 3.11). Coordinate-truncated 

ℓp ball and hemisphere ( p ≥ 2) Duffy Metric (101) Efficient digital simulation (Theorem 3.14). Sphere Sd Standard round metric Efficient digital simulation (Theorem 3.19). Simplex Sd Wright–Fisher metric 

gij (x) = xi(δij − xj)

Efficient simulation (Theorem 3.24). General compact manifolds General smooth metric g Simulation on continuum with polynomial spectral cutoff (Theorem 4.9 and Corollary 4.10). Products of constant-dimensional manifolds Product metric g = L 

> ν

gν Digital simulation with polynomial spectral cutoff (Theorem 4.23). 

Table 1: Summary of our simulation results. 

1.1.1 Global spectral methods 

The global spectral method represents the wavefunction by its coefficients in finitely many eigen-functions of the Laplace–Beltrami operator on the whole manifold. We introduce a binning func-tion for the eigenfunctions L : I → N. We define the ℓ-th level to be 

Hℓ := span {Yα : L(α) = ℓ}, VN :=

> NM
> ℓ=0

Hℓ.Let {Yα}α∈I be an orthonormal basis of eigenfunctions for −∆g. Consider a function L : I → N

that bins the eigenfunctions into spaces Hℓ := span {Yα : L(α) = ℓ}, with VN = H0 ⊕ · · · ⊕ H N .The kinetic term is diagonal in this basis and it multiplies each coefficient with a phase. The poten-tial instead acts by pointwise multiplication of f . We apply it by transforming the wavefunction to weighted values on a quadrature grid, querying f at the grid points, and transforming back. The method therefore requires a cutoff N for which the evolution restricted to VN approximates the continuum evolution, and a quantum circuit that maps coefficients in VN to weighted function values on the grid. For example, Yk(x) = e2πik ·x, L(k) = ∥k∥∞ corresponds to the Fourier spectral method. 7This approach has two distinct sources of approximation error. The first comes from restricting the wavefunction to VN . Multiplication by the potential generally produces components outside 

VN , even when the initial state has low degree. The second comes from the quadrature rule. A digital implementation replaces the integrals that define the matrix elements of the potential by finite weighted sums over the grid. If the grid cannot resolve a component produced by the potential, that component is mistaken for a combination of retained eigenfunctions. This error is called aliasing error , and previous analyses of real-space simulation algorithms control aliasing through high-order regularity bounds on the evolving wavefunction [Cha+26]. For black-box Lipschitz potentials, the grid resolution obtained from such bounds can grow exponentially with the dimension. Our analysis instead replaces the potential by a function fK ∈ V K that approximates f uni-formly. This replacement appears only in the analysis and our algorithm still queries f . The the evolutions generated by f and by fK differ by an amount proportional to ∥ f − fK ∥∞. The analysis then uses slow spectral growth of the eigenfunctions: 

Hℓ1 Hℓ2 ⊆ V ℓ1+ℓ2 . (4) This condition states the product of eigenfunctions Yα, Yβ with α ∈ L−1(ℓ1) and β ∈ L−1(ℓ2)

has no component Yγ with L(γ) > ℓ 1 + ℓ2. Consequently, each multiplication by fK raises the 

L-index of the wavefunction by at most K. If the initial state lies in VL, the term of the interaction-picture Dyson series with q applications of fK lies in VL+qK , and the norms of these terms decrease with q. Choosing the cutoff N large enough to contain the terms of low order therefore bounds the truncation error without estimating derivatives of the evolving wavefunction. Slow spectral growth also determines how many quadrature points are needed. A matrix el-ement of fK between two eigenfunctions in VN is the integral of a product of three functions of known degree, so the integrand lies in V2N+K. A quadrature rule that integrates exactly every function in V2N+K therefore reproduces the matrix of fK on VN without aliasing error. This ap-proach is called oversampling , because it uses more points than are needed to represent a state in 

VN . The total error then consists of the uniform approximation error ∥ f − fK ∥∞ and the contribu-tion of the terms of high order in the Dyson series; See Corollary 3.6. We first give explicit constructions for torus, sphere and simplex. On the torus, averaging over a finite Fourier kernel approximates the potential, and a padded quantum Fourier transform changes representations. On the sphere, evolving the potential for a short time under the heat equation suppresses high spherical harmonics while changing a Lipschitz function only slightly. The recursive structure of spherical harmonics then reduces the spectral transform to a sequence of one-dimensional polynomial transforms. On the simplex, averaging over multinomial samples produces a finite-degree polynomial approximation, while a recursive factorization of the global polynomial eigenfunctions provides the corresponding transform. The sphere and simplex trans-forms have polynomial rather than polylogarithmic dependence on the one-dimensional cutoff, but the discretization theorems keep that cutoff polynomial in the relevant problem parameters; see Theorems 3.17, 3.18, 3.22, and 3.23. The second group of examples consists of constrained domains from optimization. The posi-tive orthant encodes positivity constraints, its invertible affine images encode systems of d linearly independent linear inequalities, and ℓp balls encode norm constraints. On these domains, an ex-plicit change of coordinates makes the metric Euclidean. On the positive orthant, logarithmic coordinates transform the Laplace–Beltrami operator of the log-barrier Hessian metric into the 8Euclidean Laplacian, so simulation on a truncated orthant reduces to simulation on a box. On a truncated ℓp domain, the Duffy map, a triangular change of coordinates, gives the same reduction for a metric that we define through this map. The global results therefore use two kinds of structure. On the torus, sphere, and simplex, the eigenfunctions satisfy slow spectral growth, the potential has explicit uniform approximations by finitely many eigenfunctions, and the quantum transforms are built from explicit quadrature rules. On the orthant and ℓp domains, a change of coordinates makes the metric Euclidean. 

1.1.2 Coherent-chart methods 

The coherent-chart method applies when no tractable transform to a global eigenbasis of −∆g

is available. Instead of expanding the wavefunction in global eigenfunctions, we use ordinary Fourier expansions in local coordinate boxes. To avoid discontinuities when a local function is extended periodically across the boundary of its box, we localize the wavefunction with a smooth quadratic partition of unity {χℓ}ℓ. Each χℓ is supported away from the boundary of the corre-sponding box, and ∑ℓ χ2 

> ℓ

= 1. The localized function χℓu therefore vanishes near the boundary and has a periodic Fourier expansion in that chart. Because coordinate charts overlap, the same global amplitude can appear in several localized functions. These functions must remain as components of one quantum state so that their am-plitudes interfere correctly when they are mapped back to the manifold. In the ℓth chart, we first multiply by χℓ, then express the result in the coordinates y = κℓ(x), and finally multiply by 

ρℓ(y)1/2 , where ρℓ(y) dy is the Riemannian volume measure in those coordinates. The last oper-ation converts the local weighted L2 norm to the ordinary Lebesgue L2 norm. These operations define the isometry 

(T u)ℓ(y) = ρℓ(y)1/2 χℓ(κ−1 

> ℓ

(y)) u(κ−1 

> ℓ

(y)) .The adjoint T † maps the local functions back to the manifold and adds their amplitudes on chart overlaps. Thus T provides a coherent local representation of one global wavefunction. The main obstacle is that localizing the wavefunction also changes its kinetic energy. If one applies −∆g separately to the functions χℓu and then recombines them, the derivatives act on both u and χℓ. The resulting extra terms prevent the uncorrected local operators from reproducing 

−∆g. The Riemannian IMS identity computes their total contribution exactly: 

−∆g = ∑

> ℓ

χℓ(−∆g)χℓ − WIMS , WIMS = ∑

> ℓ

∥ dχℓ∥2 

> g−1

.Here ∥ dχℓ∥2 

> g−1

= ∥∇ χℓ∥2 

> g

measures how rapidly the cutoff changes across the manifold. The po-tential commutes with the cutoff functions, so no analogous correction is needed for the potential term. We subtract the full IMS potential WIMS from every local kinetic block. After converting the local blocks to flat measure, their corrected direct sum eH⊕(t) satisfies 

H(t) = T † eH⊕(t)T .The IMS correction therefore turns the collection of local differential operators into an exact repre-sentation of the global Riemannian Hamiltonian before any Fourier truncation is introduced. A spectral simulation replaces an infinite expansion by finitely many modes, and the cutoff determines both the approximation error and the resources needed to represent the truncated op-erator. An algorithm that retains coordinate frequencies through N requires O(d log N) qubits for 9the local Fourier labels. The largest retained derivatives also grow with N, so the normalization and simulation cost of the local kinetic blocks depend on the same parameter. A useful conver-gence result must therefore show that the target accuracy can be reached without requiring the cutoff to grow exponentially with the dimension. We analyze the cutoff in two stages. First, for a general compact manifold, we give condi-tions ensuring that the energy cutoff required to truncate the continuum model to local Fourier modes grows at most polynomially with the manifold dimension. Second, for products of fixed-dimensional manifolds, we give conditions ensuring that the retained continuum modes admit a finite-dimensional discretization with polynomial local resolution. 

Polynomial cutoff in the continuum. We begin with an analysis of the algorithm in the contin-uum. In each chart, the projection PN retains the Fourier modes with ∥k∥∞ ≤ N and discards all higher coordinate frequencies. Applying this projection before and after each local operator restricts the input to the retained modes and removes higher frequencies created by the variable coefficients. Theorem 4.9 quantifies how well the truncated local operators approximate the exact evolu-tion. While we refer to the theorem for the precise regularity conditions, the error is controlled when the evolving wavefunction has sufficiently many square-integrable derivatives, and when the change of coordinates, metric coefficients, volume densities, partition of unity, potential, and IMS correction have bounded derivatives through the same order. These conditions ensure that the high-frequency components discarded by PN decrease as N grows. If the number of con-trolled derivatives is proportional to d and the corresponding derivative bounds grow no faster than poly (d)d, Corollary 4.10 shows that N = poly (d) suffices for a fixed accuracy. 

Polynomial cutoff after discretization. A finite-dimensional implementation introduces a sec-ond problem: grids belonging to overlapping charts generally represent different points of the manifold. For a product of constant-dimensional manifolds M = ∏m 

> ν=1

Mν, we connect the local grids through finite source spaces defined separately on the factors. Choose a finite basis {L(ν) 

> q

}q

for the source space on each factor. Products of these basis functions form a basis for the global source space, so their coefficients define one global function. Evaluation maps send these global coefficients to the values of that function on each chart grid. A local discrete Fourier transform converts the sampled values to Fourier coefficients, the local Hamiltonian acts in the chart repre-sentation, and the adjoint evaluation maps return the result to the global coefficients. Because the source bases and evaluation maps factor across the manifolds Mν, these operations can be applied factor by factor on constant-dimensional (for an appropriately chosen source interpolation basis) registers. The potential may still couple all factors through its value at a product-grid point. Theorem 4.23 analyzes the resulting finite-dimensional evolution. The result assumes that the geometry of each constant-dimensional factor remains uniformly smooth as the number of fac-tors grows. It also requires source spaces that approximate sufficiently smooth functions without introducing an exponentially larger resolution, and it requires the exact and intermediate wave-functions in the error analysis to remain sufficiently differentiable. Under the precise bounds stated in the theorem, with constants C0 and β independent of d and N, satisfy sup 

> 0≤t≤T

∥u(t) − uR,N (t)∥2 ≤

 C0dβ

N

d

.10 Consequently, N = ⌈C0dβϵ−1/ d⌉ achieves error at most ϵ.

1.1.3 Applications 

Section 5 studies physical and optimization problems can be expressed as evolution under a Rie-mannian Schr ¨ odinger operator. For these applications, we give details that illustrate the uplift that can be obtained by quantum simulation on quantum manifolds. For many of the highlighted set-tings, the geometry and boundary in question is compatible with one of the end-to-end simulation algorithm given in this paper. However, we also describe some more general cases. Most of the applications below should not be interpreted as complete end-to-end quantum speedups for the surrounding task. Firstly, in addition to a simulation procedure, an end-to-end algorithm might also require the analysis of state preparation, measurement procedure, spectral gaps, or other convergence guarantees. We therefore distinguish applications that identify Rie-mannian Schr ¨ odinger evolution as a required subroutine, from settings where the end-to-end algorithm follows naturally. Secondly, we do not make an effort in this paper to optimize the polynomially scaling resources required by our simulation algorithms (a notable exception is our analysis for simulation on the torus which is the most efficient that we have found in the litera-ture.) Therefore, even when a natural end-to-end algorithm arises from our results, it does not immediately yield a quantum speedup. Finally, a detailed comparison with classical algorithms is well beyond the scope of this paper. 

Physical simulation. Section 5.1 shows that several well-studied physical systems can be written as Riemannian Schr ¨ odinger equations on high-dimensional configuration spaces. The examples include quantum mechanics on curved spaces, nonlinear sigma models with general target man-ifolds, CPN−1 models, and Hamiltonian lattice gauge theories. After spatial discretization, the field-theory Hamiltonians act on products of the target manifold or gauge group, with a sum of Laplace–Beltrami operators as the kinetic term and the interactions as a multiplication potential. We then apply the sphere algorithm to a spatially discretized O(N) nonlinear sigma model with a nearest-neighbor chordal interaction in Section 5.1.5. Theorem 5.1 gives an end-to-end digital simulation with explicit bounds on the state error and on the query, gate, and qubit costs. 

Interior-point methods. Section 5.2 discusses the quantum path-following method of Gribling, Apers, Nieuwboer, and Walter [Gri+25], which uses Schr ¨ odinger operators whose kinetic term is the Laplace–Beltrami operator of a self-concordant barrier metric. Their algorithm assumes access to controlled evolution under these operators. For the standard logarithmic barrier on the positive orthant, Theorem 3.11 supplies a digital simulation of this evolution after the domain is truncated to a compact box. The result therefore implements one of the central algorithmic primitives required by that method. 

Quantum Hamiltonian Descent. The QHD algorithm [Len+23] performs optimization by evolv-ing a wavefunction under a time-dependent Schr ¨ odinger equation whose potential is the objective function. Its Euclidean analysis uses a Lyapunov function to prove convergence for convex poten-tials. Theorem 5.6 in Section 5.3 extends this analysis to Riemannian manifolds and geodesically convex potentials. The sphere and simplex specializations in Theorems 5.8 and 5.10 combine with 11 our digital simulation algorithms to give end-to-end optimization algorithms for geodesically con-vex functions on those manifolds. 

Real-Space Adiabatic Algorithm. Herman et al. [Her+25] introduced the Real-Space Adiabatic Algorithm algorithm to study quantum speedups for structured nonconvex optimization prob-lems in Euclidean space. The algorithm begins from the ground state of a kinetic operator and adiabatically turns on the objective potential, so that the final ground state concentrates near the minimizers. In [Her+25], the authors identify mechanisms by which this algorithm offers large quantum speedups over known classical algorithms. Section 5.4 defines the corresponding Rie-mannian algorithm by replacing the Euclidean Laplacian with −∆g. Theorem 5.12 gives the adia-batic guarantee, and Theorem 5.13 gives a digital implementation on a periodic Duffy ℓp domain. The Duffy map makes this adiabatic path unitarily equivalent to the corresponding path on a Euclidean box, so the mechanisms identified by Herman et al. carry over to these constrained problems. 

1.2 Related work 

Real-space simulation on flat domains. Digital simulation of the time-dependent Schr ¨ odinger equation on a position grid goes back to Wiesner and Zalka [Wie96; Zal98]. Kassal et al. used the grid-based split-operator approach, which alternates between position and momentum rep-resentations via the quantum Fourier transform, to simulate chemical dynamics [Kas+08]. First-quantized plane-wave algorithms later achieved sublinear scaling in the basis size [Bab+19] and explicit fault-tolerant resource estimates for chemistry [Su+21]. The analyses discussed in the in-troduction [Kiv+17; Chi+22; Cha+26] all bound the discretization error through the regularity of the evolving wavefunction, either assumed or, in the black-box Lipschitz setting, proved. Our global spectral method takes a different approach: aliasing is removed exactly for a finite-mode comparison potential, so no high-order regularity bound on the evolution is needed. On the flat torus, this yields a register of O(d log Q) qubits with Q = poly (d, 1/ ϵ) (Theorem 3.8). 

Quantum simulation on curved configuration spaces in physics. Several physical models al-ready have curved configuration spaces, and their quantum simulation has been studied directly. For O(N) nonlinear sigma models, proposals include an analog laboratory simulator for the O(3)

model [SM05], a digital scheme that replaces the target sphere by the fuzzy sphere while pre-serving the exact O(3) symmetry [Ale+19], and qubit regularizations with few qubits per site that reproduce the relevant critical behavior [SC19; Sin22]; Hamiltonian lattice gauge theories raise the same questions for compact gauge groups [Ba ˜ n+20]. These works construct model-specific finite Hilbert spaces and justify them through universality arguments supported by numerics, rather than through bounds on the error relative to the continuum dynamics. On the contrary, we provide a general construction that applies to any compact manifold with the required structure, together with explicit bounds on the error relative to the continuum Schr ¨ odinger evolution with a black-box potential. 

Quantum dynamical optimization with geometry. Beyond the works mentioned in the intro-duction, Quantum Hamiltonian Descent now includes stochastic [Pen+25] and gradient-augmented [LS25] variants, as well as fault-tolerant resource estimates [Liu+26]. In all of these, the kinetic 12 term is Euclidean. Constraints have so far been handled outside the dynamics, for instance by embedding QHD in an augmented-Lagrangian loop that solves a sequence of unconstrained sub-problems [LFH25; Wu+26]. Two works put geometry into the kinetic term: Gribling et al. [Gri+25] assume access to the Riemannian evolution, and Abe and Nagai [AN26] assume sparse access to a chosen discretization of the Laplace–Beltrami operator; neither constructs these objects or bounds the resulting error. Our algorithms supply this step for the manifolds in Table 1; Section 5 discusses the consequences for optimization in more detail. To our knowledge, the global spectral methods of this paper are the first digital quantum al-gorithms with end-to-end discretization error bounds for Schr ¨ odinger dynamics with a black-box potential on non-flat configuration spaces, and the coherent-chart method extends the continuum convergence analysis to general compact manifolds under explicit geometric and regularity as-sumptions. 

# 2 Preliminaries and Notation 

Riemannian geometry is a rich topic of mathematics that we cannot hope to cover in detail here. See [Lee18] for an excellent introduction. We will merely establish some basic notation and results relevant to this work. Throughout this work, the natural numbers N are defined with 0 included. A manifold is a Hausdorff, second countable topological space M, which is locally Euclidean, in the sense that there exists an atlas {(Uα, κα)}α∈I , where {Uα}α∈I is an open cover, and 

κα : Uα → Ωα ⊆ Rd (5) is a homeomorphism defining local coordinates. Here d ∈ Z+ is the manifold dimension. M is, more specifically, a smooth manifold when the transition maps 

ταβ = κα ◦ κ−1 

> β

. (6) are diffeomorphisms whenever Uα ∩ Uβ is not empty. For finite-dimensional smooth manifolds, it is known that there exists a smooth atlas containing at most d + 1 charts [Sol74]. From computa-tional purposes, assuming a finite set of charts is natural and perhaps necessary. In this work, all atlases are finite , and one can take I = [ nch ] for some nch ∈ Z+. Smoothness allows for the con-struction of tangent spaces T pM at each point x ∈ M , and the disjoint union of these d-dimensional vector spaces defines the tangent bundle TM.A Riemannian manifold (M, g) is a smooth manifold M endowed with a metric g. This metric is a smooth, positive definite symmetric (0, 2 )-tensor field, which defines an inner product at each 

p ∈ M via 

⟨w, v⟩g := gp(w, v), w, v ∈ TpM. (7) Local coordinates computations via the atlas provide a convenient setting for calculation, and are indicated by use of indices with appropriate subscript or superscript. We denote the metric in coordinates as gij and inverse metric is given by gij . Einstein summation notation is used for brevity. As the name suggests, the metric provides a local notion of distance, and encodes geometrical properties of the space such as curvature, volume, and shortest paths between points. Let us now define those relevant to this work. Given a smooth vector field v, define the scalar field 13 |v|g := pg(v, v). Let |g| := det (gij ). In local coordinates x = ( x1, . . . , xd), the natural, coordinate-invariant volume measure on M is then dvol g(x) := ρ(x)dx , ρ(x) :=

q

|g(x)| (8) where dx ≡ dx 1 . . . dx d is the volume form. This can be used to define the Hilbert space of wave-functions on M.

H = L2(M, dvol g) = 



ψ : M → C

> Z
> M

|ψ(x)|2 dvol g(x) < ∞



(9) Because M is second countable, H is separable [Fol99], thus admitting a countable orthonormal basis. For brevity, we may simply write L2 or L2(M). The inner product ⟨ψ, ϕ⟩ and norm ∥ψ∥ are then defined in the usual manner on H. The distance dg between two points x, y in (a connected component of) M is 

dg(x, y) := inf  

> γ∈C(x,y)
> Z10

| ˙σ(u)|g du (10) where C(x, y) is the set of smooth curves from x to y parametrized on [0, 1 ], and ˙ σ(u) ∈ Tσ(u)M

denotes a derivative. Let f , v be a smooth scalar and vector fields, respectively. Riemannian generalizations of the gradient and divergence are given, in coordinates, by 

∇i f = gij ∂j f , ∇ · v = 1

p|g| ∂i

q 

|g|vi



. (11) The natural generalization of the Laplacian to Riemannian manifolds, sometimes termed the 

Laplace–Beltrami operator, is then simply the divergence of the gradient. Explicitly, 

∆g f = ρ−1∂i



ρgij ∂j f



. (12) When M is compact, ∆g is negative semi-definite and its eigenfunctions form a smooth orthogonal basis. The spectrum of −∆g is a discrete sequence tending to infinity 0 = λ0 < λ1 < . . . < λn → +∞.The associated eigenspaces are finite dimensional. See [Ros97] for more detail. Let exp x : TxM → M be the exponential map, which sends a tangent vector v ∈ TxM to the point reached at time 1 by the geodesic starting at x with initial velocity v. Wherever exp x is one-to-one along the minimizing geodesic from x to y, the Riemannian logarithm log x : Ux → Tx M is defined as its local inverse. log x (y) = v ⇐⇒ exp x(v) = y (13) Equivalently, if γ ∈ C(x, y) is the unique minimizing geodesic from x to y, then log x (y) = ˙γ(0), | log x (y)|g = dg(x, y). (14) In short, log x(y) naturally generalizes the idea of the vector y − x in Euclidean space, which points from x to y and whose length is the distance. The corresponding unit direction is log x (y)/dg(x, y)

when x̸ = y. We emphasize that this logarithm function is defined only under the provided assumptions of unique geodesics. A particular setting where this occurs is for geodesically convex sets. 14 Definition 2.1 (Geodesic convexity) . A subset C of a Riemannian manifold (M, g) is geodesically con-vex if for each p , q ∈ S, there exists a unique minimizing geodesic segment from p to q, whose image lies entirely in C.

Geodesically convex sets always exists: take, for instance, sufficiently small geodesic balls. In con-tinuous optimization, convexity of a function is a useful and often practical assumption that allows for efficient gradient-based algorithms. See [Bub15] or other standard sources for background and basic definitions. A natural generalization to manifolds is as follows. 

Definition 2.2 (Geodesically convex functions) . For C geodesically convex, a function f : C → R is geodesically convex if, for every unit-velocity geodesic arc γ contained in C, the composition f ◦ γ is convex as a real function. 

Proposition 2.3 (Geodesic convexity, differentiable function) . For C geodesically convex, a differen-tiable function f : C → R is geodesically convex if and only if for every x , y ∈ C connected by a geodesic: f (y) ≥ f (x) + ⟨∇ f (x), log x (y)⟩g

We say that a function f : M → R is geodesically G-Lipschitz if it is G-Lipschitz continuous with respect to dg.A useful identity for bounding the difference in two Hamiltonian evolutions is given by Duhamel’s formula. 

Fact 2.4 (Duhamel’s formula) . Let H (t) and eH(t) be self-adjoint families on a Hilbert space with unitary propagators, and suppose both evolutions start from u (0). If u and eu solve the two Schr¨ odinger equations with initial state u (0) then 

∥u(t) − eu(t)∥ ≤  

> Zt
> 0

[H(s) − eH(s)] u(s) ds. (15) 

# 3 Global Spectral Methods 

Spectral methods approximate the solution of a differential equation using a finite-dimensional space spanned by globally supported basis functions. The basis is chosen to reflect the domain, boundary conditions, and differential operator; standard examples include Fourier modes on pe-riodic domains and orthogonal polynomial systems, such as Chebyshev or Legendre polynomials, on bounded intervals. Galerkin methods impose the equation by projection, whereas collocation and pseudospectral methods evaluate some terms on a quadrature grid. For a periodic Euclidean Schr ¨ odinger equation, the natural specialization is the Fourier pseudospectral method: a finite Fourier series represents the wavefunction, the kinetic operator is diagonal in the Fourier basis, and the potential is evaluated in the dual position representation. This specialization was used for real-space quantum simulation in [Chi+22], and a rigorous end-to-end analysis for black-box Lipschitz potentials was given in [Cha+26]. On a compact Riemannian manifold, the natural generalization is to replace Fourier modes by global eigenfunctions of the nonnegative Laplace–Beltrami operator. One retains a finite spectral subspace, applies the kinetic evolution diagonally in its coefficient basis, and evaluates the poten-tial by mapping to weighted values on a quadrature grid and back. We call this construction the 

global spectral method .15 This formal replacement does not by itself give an efficient digital algorithm. One must con-trol both leakage from the the finite-dimensional space of retained eigenmodes (i.e. Galerkin method) under multiplication by the potential and aliasing when its matrix elements of the pro-jected Hamiltonian are replaced by finite quadrature (i.e. collocation method). In the periodic Euclidean setting, [Cha+26] controls dynamical aliasing for black-box Lipschitz potentials using mollification and high-order Sobolev bounds on the evolving wavefunction. Since the deriva-tive order grows with the dimension and the mollified potential is not band limited, the resulting sufficient grid resolution can be exponential in the dimension. This does not yield a polynomial implementation of the spherical and simplex constructions below, whose transform costs are poly-nomial in the one-dimensional quadrature resolution. For each of the manifolds that we consider, we introduce a uniformly close, exactly band-limited proxy for the potential only in the analysis. Thus for finite time, if the initial wave function has finite bandwidth, then the Galerkin evolution can be shown to be close to a truncate evolu-tion with finite-bandwidth. Since the wavefunction now only have support on a finite band, we can use Gauss quadrature to exactly evaluated the Hamiltonian matrix elements, by sufficient oversampling. The framework below formalizes these analytic and implementation requirements before treating the torus, sphere, and simplex. Consider finite-dimensional spaces spanned by eigenfunctions of the nonnegative Laplace– Beltrami operator −∆g on L2(M). Let {Yα}α∈I be an orthonormal eigenbasis, so that 

−∆gYα = λαYα, (16) where it leave it implicit that we allow for degeneracy, for example λα′ = λα for α̸ = α′. We introduce a binning function for the eigenfunctions L : I → N. Define the ℓ-the level to be 

Hℓ := span {Yα : L(α) = ℓ}, VN :=

> NM
> ℓ=0

Hℓ.We assume that every VN is finite-dimensional and that their union is dense in L2(M). Denote by 

PN the orthogonal projector onto VN . For example in the case of Fourier modes e2πik ·x, the levels are determined by ∥k∥∞.We will use the following notion of a Q-exact quadrature rule for (M, g, ∆g). Such a rule will be required by our algorithm and explictly constructed for our example manifolds. 

Definition 3.1 (Q-exact quadrature) . Using the notation introduced above. We say that {(xj, wj)}JQ

> j=1

,with points x j ∈ M and associated weights w j > 0 form a Q-exact quadrature rule if 

⟨ϕ, ψ⟩wQ :=

> JQ

# ∑

> j=1

wjϕ(xj)ψ(xj)

is equal to the standard inner product ⟨ϕ, ψ⟩ on the subspace VQ.

For example, for the symmetric Fourier filtration, Q-exactness requires the scalar quadrature to integrate every Fourier mode with ∥k∥∞ ≤ 2Q exactly. The symmetric grid with 2 Q + 1 points per coordinate has this property. 16 Fix N ≤ Q and consider a computational basis consisting of elements |α⟩ for L(α) ≤ N, used to represent VN in the spectral basis. Then, the linear map 

W |α⟩ = |Yα⟩ :=

> JQ

# ∑

> j=1

pwj Yα(xj) |j⟩ , L(α) ≤ N (17) is an isometry. As a guiding example, on the flat torus with standard Laplacian, choose the sym-metric (2Q + 1)-point grid in each coordinate. Then JQ = ( 2Q + 1)d, and the weighted evaluation isometry is a padded inverse (2Q + 1)-point QFT. The odd grid length prevents the endpoint modes Q and −Q from aliasing. With these ingredients, and from a spectral point of view the reader may anticipate the nat-ural discretized Hamiltonian to consider. For the potential, let ˆf := ∑j f (xj) |j⟩⟨ j|. Define the diagonalized Laplace–Beltrami operator mode by mode as 

DN := ∑

> α:L(α)≤N

λα|α⟩⟨ α|. (18) Then the discrete Hamiltonian we will simulate is ˆH(t) := a(t)DN + b(t)W† ˆf W . (19) With access to f provided via, say, standard binary oracles, one arrives at setting where meth-ods of finite-dimensional time dependent Hamiltonian simulation can be applied. In particular, we will consider an interaction picture method in the frame of U0, the propagator for a(t)DN .Additionally, in our setting W will likely be only an isometry, due to the number of grid points J

being chosen to be larger than N. This will not be a problem as the underlying digital simulation algorithm only needs access to a block-encoding for W† ˆf W .The particular implementation of W, W†, determination quadrature, etc. are necessarily case-by-case, and not generally efficient. For several cases of interest where these transformations are tractible and provide polynomial-time algorithms, are first considered starting in subsection 3.2. Before that, we first consider a general error analysis which informs the required overhead needed to achieve a given accuracy with respect to the true continuous dynamics. 

3.1 General framework 

Consider the ideal Schr ¨ odinger evolution 

i∂tu(t) = [ −a(t)∆g + b(t) f ]u(t),for initial data u(0) ∈ L2(M). The Galerkin evolution corresponding to PN is 

i∂tuN (t) = −a(t)∆guN (t) + b(t)PN ( f u N (t)) , uN (0) = u(0)

which continuously projects the evolution back into VN even as f induces transitions outside 

VN . However, even this approximation to the actual evolution may not be possible to implement in practice. This is because it may not be possible to exactly compute matrix elements of the Hamiltonian, for example PN f P N , using a finite grid if f does not lie in VN . This due to the aliasing phenomenon, which is a result of the quadrature grid being unable to resolve components 17 associated with eigenfunctions outside VN . Thus with numerical quadrature the actual evolution corresponds to 

i∂tuN,Q = −a(t)∆guN,Q + b(t)IN,Q

  f u N,Q

, uN,Q(0) = u(0),where 

IN,Qψ := ∑  

> α∈N|L(α)≤N

⟨Yα, ψ⟩wQ Yα. (20) The following derives a direct connection between the above evolution and the one in (19). 

Proposition 3.2. Let n N = dim VN and let SN : CnN → V N , SN |α⟩ = Yα,

be the coefficient-to-function unitary. Let W be the isometry in (17) , formed using the same Q-exact quadra-ture rule as I N,Q, and let ˆH(t) be defined by (19) . Then SN ˆH(t)S† 

> N

v = −a(t)∆gv + b(t)IN,Q( f v ), v ∈ V N . (21) 

Consequently, if u N,Q solves (45) , then cN,Q(t) := S† 

> N

uN,Q(t)

solves i∂tcN,Q(t) = ˆH(t)cN,Q(t). (22) 

Proof. For v = SN c ∈ V N , the definition of DN gives SN DN c = −∆gv. Moreover, for every 

⟨α| W† ˆf Wc ⟩ =

> JQ

# ∑

> j=1

wjYα(xj) f (xj)v(xj)= ⟨Yα, f v ⟩wQ .Applying SN and summing over ℓ, m gives SNW† ˆf WS † 

> N

v = IN,Q( f v ), which proves (21). Apply-ing S† 

> N

to (45) proves (22). Because of the above relation, we can then pass a block-encoding of the Hamiltonian (19) to a standard time-dependent Hamiltonian simulation routine to approximate the evolution of the coefficients ⟨Yα, ψ⟩wQ . Suppose that Uf is a Λ f -normalized block encoding of the sampled potential, 

(⟨0a|A ⊗ IR)Uf (|0a⟩A ⊗ IR) = ˆf

Λ f

, Λ f ≥ ∥ f ∥∞ . (23) Since W is an isometry, there exists a unitary dilation UW acts on a quadrature register R and coefficient register C according to 

UW

 |0⟩R |ψ⟩C

 =  W |ψ⟩ 

> R

|0⟩C (24) for every valid coefficient state. Then 

UV := ( IA ⊗ U† 

> W

)( Uf ⊗ IC )( IA ⊗ UW ) (25) 18 is a block encoding of the compressed potential on coefficient space: 

(⟨0a|A ⟨0|R ⊗ IC )UV (|0a⟩A |0⟩R ⊗ IC ) = W† ˆf W 

Λ f

. (26) Such a block-encoded can be used by interaction picture simulation methods [LW18]. The evolu-tion under DN is diagonal and thus can be fast forwarded. For each of the manifolds we consider, will need to show bound the cost of building this access. In comparison to what [Chi+22; Cha+26], who took Q = N for the Euclidean spectral method, we will choose Q in a different manner. Particularly, our chose of Q will come from analying how the support of a band-limited wavefunction evolves over time given a band-limited potential. The band-limited potential will be a sufficiently close proxy for the true one. Thus a sufficiently large 

Q can make the Galerkin and quadrature-based evolutions equal if both are started from the same initial bounded-bandwidth wavefunction. In what follows, we will prove this first in the abstract setting under a set of sufficient technical conditions. Then in later sections we show that manifolds that we consider satisfy those conditions. The first condition we require the eigenfunction filtration {V N }N≥0 to satisfy what we call slow spectral growth . For subspaces of pointwise-defined functions, write 

VK VN := span {uv : u ∈ V K, v ∈ V N }.We assume that the filtration is invariant under pointwise complex conjugation and that 

VN = VN , VK VN ⊆ V K+N , K, N ∈ N, (27) where the overline denotes pointwise complex conjugation. Equivalently, it is enough to require 

HkHn ⊆ V k+n together with conjugation invariance. Since every level VN is spanned by eigen-functions of −∆g, the kinetic propagator preserves each VN even when a level contains several distinct eigenvalues. In our applications, the relevant levels are Fourier degree ∥k∥∞ on the flat torus, spherical-harmonic degree on Sd, and total Jacobi degree on the simplex. The second requirement is a smoothing operation that, for a bounded function f and target ac-curacy ϵ > 0, produces a band limit K and a function fK ∈ V K such that ∥ f − fK ∥∞ ≤ ϵ. This is to introduce the aformentioend finite-bandwidth proxy for the potential. Then suppose u and 

uK solve the Schr ¨ odinger equations with potentials f and fK, respectively, from a common nor-malized initial state u(0) ∈ V K0 . Write B1(t) := R t 

> 0

|b(s)| ds and B1 := B1(T). Duhamel’s formula gives 

∥u(t) − uK (t)∥ ≤ B1(t) ∥ f − fK ∥∞ .The last requirement is a transform condition . For each exactness degree Q, let JQ be the total number of quadrature nodes. Associate to the construction a local resolution parameter RQ ≥ 2satisfying log JQ = O(d log RQ).For a product rule with coordinate node counts RQ,1 , . . . , RQ,d, one may take RQ := max i RQ,i.For every N ≤ Q, we require the weighted evaluation isometry (17) and its adjoint to be imple-mentable to operator error ϵtr using poly (d, N, RQ, log (1/ ϵtr )) 

19 elementary gates and 

O(log JQ + log dim VN + polylog (dNR Q/ϵtr )) 

qubits. For isotropic product grids, RQ = Θ(J1/ dQ ). The torus, sphere, and simplex constructions below satisfy this condition with RQ = Θ(Q).This condition is deliberately weaker than the fast-transform regime available in special cases. Fourier transforms, and Hermite transforms [Jai+26] in settings admitting fast quantum imple-mentations, can have gate complexity polynomial in d, log RQ, and log (1/ ϵtr ). We allow poly-nomial dependence on RQ itself so that the framework also includes the spherical and simplex transforms constructed below, while the required number of qubits remains logarithmic in the total node count. Even in this weaker form, the transform condition is not automatic. For generic polynomial systems on nonrectangular domains, no uniform construction with gate complexity polynomial in d, N, RQ, and log (1/ ϵtr ) is known. The sphere and simplex satisfy the condition because their eigenfunctions admit recursive factorizations into controlled one-dimensional polynomial trans-forms. Furthermore, for our analysis, the transform needs to load the eigenfunctions over a Q-exact quadrature grid (Definition (3.1)) for arbitrary Q. This is critical so that sufficient oversam-pling can make discrete sums equal integrals, i.e. pseudospectral becomes Galerkin. It may be possible to obtain more efficient transforms that load the eigenfunctions over a completely differ-ent grid. With the three main conditions—slow spectral growth, a smoothing operation, and the trans-form condition—in place, we are ready show how these can be used to (1) substantially simplify the analysis of global spectral methods and (2) lead to resource-efficient discretizations. For a band-limited fK, we first bound the Galerkin error via a Dyson series approach. 

Lemma 3.3 (Galerkin error from Dyson series) . Suppose f K ∈ V K. Consider the evolution i∂tuK (t) = [ −a(t)∆g + b(t) fK ]uK (t), uK (0) = u0

and its Galerkin approximation i∂tuK,N (t) = PN [−a(t)∆g + b(t) fK ]PN uK,N (t), uK,N (0) = u0,

with u 0 ∈ V K0 . If N ≥ K0 + ( q − 1)K for a positive integer q ≥ 2eB 1(t) ∥ fK ∥∞, then 

∥uK (t) − uK,N (t)∥ ≤ 42q . (28) 

Proof. Let U0(t, s) be the kinetic propagator generated by −a(t)∆g. We compare the two evolutions in the interaction picture U0. Let 

vK (t) := U0(t, 0 )†uK (t), vK,N (t) := U0(t, 0 )†uK,N (t).Define the interaction-picture potential operator 

fK,I (t) := U0(t, 0 )† fKU0(t, 0 ).20 Because U0(t, 0 ) is diagonal in the eigenbasis of −∆g, fK,I (t) has the same spectral bandwidth as multiplication by fK. The exact and Galerkin interaction-picture equations are, respectively, 

i∂tvK (t) = b(t) fK,I (t)vK (t), i∂tvK,N (t) = b(t)PN fK,I (t)vK,N (t).Both initial values equal u(0) because u(0) ∈ V N . Their Dyson expansions are 

vK (t) = 

> ∞

# ∑

> n=0

Dn(t)u(0), vK,N (t) = 

> ∞

# ∑

> n=0

Dn,N (t)u(0), (29) which converge absolutely in spectral norm. For n ≥ 1, 

Dn(t)u(0) := ( −i)n

Z 

> 0<tn<··· <t1<t

" n

# ∏

> j=1

b(tj)

#

fK,I (t1) · · · fK,I (tn)u(0) dtn · · · dt1, (30) 

Dn,N (t)u(0) := ( −i)n

Z 

> 0<tn<··· <t1<t

" n

# ∏

> j=1

b(tj)

#

PN fK,I (t1)PN · · · PN fK,I (tn)PN u(0) dtn · · · dt1. (31) while D0 = D0, N = I. Consider a fixed term D in either sum. We first prove equality of the low-order terms. Fix n < q. For every intermediate index 0 ≤ j ≤ n, the cutoff assumption gives 

K0 + jK ≤ K0 + ( q − 1)K ≤ N. (32) After the first j applications of fK,I to a state on the right, either integrand has degree at most 

K0 + jK . For such states, PN acts trivially. This implies 

Dn,N (t)u(0) = Dn(t)u(0), 0 ≤ n ≤ q − 1. (33) Next, we bound the Dyson terms for n ≥ q. By properties of projectors and unitarity, 

∥PN fK,I (s)PN ∥ ≤ ∥ fK,I (s)∥ = ∥ fK ∥∞ . (34) Thus, by the triangle inequality and the bounds above, both terms satisfy max {∥D n,N (t)u(0)∥ , ∥D n(t)u(0)∥} ≤ ∥ fK ∥n

> ∞

Z 

> 0<tn<··· <t1<tn

# ∏

> j=1

b(tj) dtn · · · dt1. (35) Moreover, 

Z 

> 0<tn<··· <t1<tn

# ∏

> j=1

b(tj) dtn · · · dt1 = 1

n!

Z t

> 0

|b(s)| ds

n

= 1

n! B1(t)n. (36) Altogether, this gives the common estimate 

∥D n(t)u(0)∥ , ∥D n,N (t)u(0)∥ ≤ B1(t)n ∥ fK ∥n

> ∞

n! . (37) This proves absolute convergence for both series with respect to spectral norm. 21 Subtracting the series, terms of order below q cancel exactly. The remaining difference can be bounded via the triangle inequality. 

∥vK (t) − vK,N (t)∥ ≤ 

> ∞

# ∑

> n=q

∥D n(t)u(0)∥ +

> ∞

# ∑

> n=q

∥D n,N (t)u(0)∥ ≤ 2

> ∞

# ∑

> n=q

Bn

n! . (38) where B := B1(t) ∥ fK ∥∞. The remainder term of the exponential can be bounded using elementary arguments. A Stirling bound gives 

Bq

q! ≤

 eB q

q

≤ 2−q

when q ≥ 2eB . For n ≥ q, consecutive terms satisfy 

Bn+1/(n + 1)!

Bn/n! = Bn + 1 ≤ Bq + 1 ≤ 12 .Therefore ∞

# ∑

> n=q

Bn

n! ≤ 2−q ∞

# ∑

> j=0

2−j = 21−q.Plugging this into Eq. (38), and using unitarity of U0, gives the result. In practice, we will be interested in the N-level Galerkin evolution for the exact potential f ,which we assume accessed is via oracle. As such, the error bound above for truncated fK serves as a useful tool for extracting the true Galerkin error, as given below. The error between the evolu-tions with potential f and fK can be bounded via the previously mentioned Duhamel’s principle argument. 

Theorem 3.4 (Exact-potential Galerkin error) . Assume the slow spectral growth condition (27) . Let f ∈ L∞(M) be real valued, let f K ∈ V K be real valued, and let u, u K, and u K,N be the evolutions defined above from a common normalized initial state u (0) ∈ V K0 . Let u N (t) ∈ V N solve the level-N Galerkin equation with the exact potential f , i∂tuN = PN

−a(t)∆g + b(t) f  PN uN , uN (0) = u(0). (39) 

If N ≥ K0 + ( q − 1)K for q ≥ 2eB 1(t)∥ fK ∥∞, then 

∥u(t) − uN (t)∥ ≤ 2B1(t) ∥ f − fK ∥∞ + 42q . (40) 

Proof. Fact 2.4 and Lemma 3.3 first give 

∥u(t) − uK,N (t)∥ ≤ B1(t) ∥ f − fK ∥∞ + 42q . (41) For every v ∈ V N , Bessel’s inequality gives 

PN

 ( f − fK )v 2 = ∑  

> α∈N|L(α)≤N

|⟨ Yα, ( f − fK )v⟩| 2

≤ ∥ ( f − fK )v∥2 ≤ ∥ f − fK ∥2 

> ∞

∥v∥2 .22 Thus the generators of uN and uK,N differ in norm by at most |b(t)| ∥ f − fK ∥∞. A second applica-tion of Duhamel’s formula yields 

∥uN (t) − uK,N (t)∥ ≤ B1(t) ∥ f − fK ∥∞ .Combining this estimate with (41) proves (40). We will now move to analyzing the error associated with the quadrature-based (collocation) method. As mentioned earlier, the continuous-space projector PN is replaced with the quadrature-based projection IN,Q given by (20). The discrepancy between IN,Q and PN is referred to as aliasing .More generally, for ψ ∈ V R,

IN,Qψ = PN ψ whenever Q ≥ max (N, R). (42) Indeed, for ⟨Yα, ψ⟩ with L(α) ≤ N, both ψ and Yα belong to VQ, so the identity follows directly from Q-exactness of the discrete inner product and (20). This has the immediate implication. 

Proposition 3.5 (Exact quadrature implementation of the Galerkin projector) . Suppose the filtration 

{V N }N≥0 satisfies slow spectral growth, f K ∈ V K, and I N,Q is constructed from a Q-exact quadrature rule. If Q ≥ N + K, then IN,Q VN+K = PN VN+K . (43) 

In particular, for every v ∈ V N ,IN,Q( fK v) = PN ( fK v). (44) 

Proof. Equation (43) follows from (42). Slow spectral growth gives fK v ∈ V N+K, which proves (44). We now use this exactness to pass from the continuum Galerkin estimate to the quadrature evolution. 

Corollary 3.6 (Oversampled quadrature error) . Under the assumptions of Theorem 3.4, let I N,Q be constructed from a Q-exact quadrature rule with Q ≥ N + K, and let u N,Q(t) ∈ V N solve i∂tuN,Q = −a(t)∆guN,Q + b(t)IN,Q

  f u N,Q

, euN,Q(0) = u(0), (45) 

where f : M → R is pointwise bounded. Then for all t ∈ [0, T]

∥u(t) − uN,Q(t)∥ ≤ 2B1(t) ∥ f − fK ∥∞ + 22−q. (46) 

Moreover, let h : M → R be pointwise bounded and suppose that a real h K ∈ V K is given. Then 

> JQ

# ∑

> j=1

wjh(xj) uN,Q(t, xj) 2 −

> Z
> M

h(x) |u(t, x)|2 dvol g(x)

≤ 4B1(t) ∥hK ∥∞ ∥ f − fK ∥∞ + 23−q ∥hK ∥∞ + 2 ∥h − hK ∥∞ . (47) 23 Proof. Proposition 3.5 identifies the quadrature evolution with potential fK exactly with uK,N . The same Duhamel comparison, with IN,Q in place of PN , proves (46). Finally, Q ≥ N + K and slow spectral growth imply 

> JQ

# ∑

> j=1

wjhK (xj) uN,Q(t, xj) 2 =

> Z
> M

hK (x) |uN,Q(t, x)|2 dvol g(x).Both evolutions preserve the norm. Inserting hK on the discrete and continuous sides, and using 

|⟨ v, hK v⟩ − ⟨ z, hK z⟩| ≤ 2 ∥hK ∥∞ ∥v − z∥

for normalized v and z, proves (47). 

3.2 Flat Torus 

The flat torus is the Riemannian quotient manifold Td = Rd/Zd with Euclidean metric. Con-cretely, it admits a global parametrization via the set S = [ −1/2, 1/2 ]d, with periodic boundary conditions in each coordinate. For the torus, the Laplace–Beltrami operator ∆g is diagonalized by Fourier modes and there already exists other simulation algorithms for the torus [Chi+22; Cha+26]. We present an alternative algorithm and analysis that leads to exponential improvement in discretization spacing and a quadratic reduction in the number of qubits in terms of d. Through a change-of-coordinates, this also leads to simulation algorithms for the positive orthant with the log-barrier Hessian metric, polyhedral log-barrier Hessian metric for full-rank constraint matrix, and ℓp balls. We start by presenting a smoothing procedure that takes f ∈ L2(M) and maps it to a finite-degree Fourier polynomial with controllable error. For an integer m ≥ 2, define the following Jackson Kernel 

Am(t) = 

 sin (mπt)

sin (πt)

4

, t ∈ [−1/2, 1/2 ], (48) 

Jm(t) = Am(t)

R 1/2  

> −1/2

Am(s) ds , (49) 

Jm,d(x) = 

> d

# ∏

> j=1

Jm(xj). (50) At t = 0 the ratio is defined by continuity. The kernel Jm,d is a probability distribution on S with i.i.d. distributed components according to Jm. It is also a Fourier polynomial of degree 2 (m − 1).

Lemma 3.7 (Jackson-Fourier Smoother) . Let f : S → R be geodesically G-Lipschitz continuous on Td.Then the Jackson-smoothed function fm := Jm,d ∗Td f =

> Z
> S

Jm,d(z) f (x − z)dz (51) 

satisfies 

∥ f − fm∥∞ ≤ 3G√dm , ∥ fm∥∞ ≤ ∥ f ∥∞ . (52) 

and has Fourier support in [−2(m − 1), 2 (m − 1)] d.

24 Proof. First, as a continuous function on a compact space Td, f is bounded. Note that Jm,d is a probability density on S by construction. Thus, 

| fm(x)| ≤ 

> Z
> S

Jm,d(z)| f (x − z)| dz ≤ ∥ f ∥∞ ,which proves the second inequality in (52). Next, we prove that fm only has support on Fourier modes with frequencies in [−2(m −

1), 2 (m − 1)] d. Define 

Dm(t) :=

> m−1

# ∑

> r=0

e2πirt .For t /∈ Z, by the formula for finite geometric series, 

Dm(t) = 1 − e2πimt 

1 − e2πit = eπi(m−1)t sin (mπt)

sin (πt) .This equality also holds at integer arguments after continuous extension. Consequently, 

 sin (mπt)

sin (πt)

2

= |Dm(t)|2 =

> m−1

# ∑

> r,s=0

e2πi(r−s)t

=

> m−1

# ∑

> k=−(m−1)

(m − | k|)e2πikt .Indeed, for fixed k = r − s there are exactly m − | k| pairs (r, s). Thus the squared ratio has Fourier support in [−(m − 1), m − 1]. Since Am is the square of this trigonometric polynomial, multiplica-tion convolves its Fourier coefficients and gives supp bAm ⊆ [−2(m − 1), 2 (m − 1)] .And hence also for Jm. Finally, the product definition gives supp dJm,d ⊆ [−2(m − 1), 2 (m − 1)] d.The convolution theorem for Fourier transforms implies fm has the same Fourier support. Finally, we prove the first inequality in (52). For every x ∈ S, the convolution definition and the Lipschitz condition give 

| fm(x) − f (x)| ≤ 

> Z
> S

Jm,d(z)| f (x − z) − f (x)| dz

≤ GEJm,d [∥Z∥], (53) and thus we only need to analyze the moments of Jm,d.The function x 7 → sin x is concave on [0, π/2 ], so it lies above the chord joining (0, 0 ) and 

(π/2, 1 ). Hence sin x ≥ 2x

π , 0 ≤ x ≤ π

2 .25 If |t| ≤ 1/ (2m), then x = mπ|t| ∈ [0, π/2 ], and oddness of sine gives 

| sin (mπt)| = sin (mπ|t|) ≥ 2mπ|t|

π = 2m|t|.The elementary inequality | sin y| ≤ | y| also gives 

| sin (πt)| ≤ π|t|.For 0 < |t| ≤ 1/ (2m), division therefore yields 

sin (mπt)

sin (πt) ≥ 2m

π .The same bound holds at t = 0 by continuity, since the ratio tends to m and m ≥ 2m/π. It follows that Z 1/2 

> −1/2

Am(t) dt ≥

Z 1/ (2m)

> −1/ (2m)

 2m

π

4

dt = 1

m

16 m4

π4 = 16 m3

π4 . (54) From the above, for all |t| ≤ 1/2, 

|sin (πt)| ≥ 2|t|,so |t| ≤ 1/2 

sin (mπt)

sin (πt) ≤ min 



m, 12|t|



. (55) We now split the moment integrals at 1/ m. This point lies in [0, 1/2 ] because m ≥ 2. By evenness of Am and (55), 

Am(t) ≤

(

m4, 0 ≤ t ≤ 1/ m,

(2t)−4 = 1/ (16 t4), 1/ m ≤ t ≤ 1/2. (56) Thus the numerator of the second moment satisfies 

Z 1/2 

> −1/2

t2 Am(t) dt = 2

Z 1/ m

> 0

t2 Am(t) dt + 2

Z 1/2 1/ m

t2 Am(t) dt

≤ 2m4

Z 1/ m

> 0

t2 dt + 216 

Z 1/2 1/ m

t−2 dt

= 2m4

 t3

3

1/ m

> 0

+ 18



− 1

t

1/2 1/ m

= 2m

3 + m − 28 = 19 24 m − 14 ≤ 19 24 m. (57) Division by (54) gives 

Z

t2 Jm(t) dt ≤ 19 π4

384 m2 < 9

m2 . (58) Also, 

E ∥Z∥2 ≤



E ∥Z∥22

1/2 

≤ 3√dm , (59) which combined with (53) proves the first inequality in (52) 26 To summarize, for sufficiently large Fourier degree m, any Lipschitz function on Td can be made 

O(ϵ) close to a Fourier polynomial, with error falling as O(m−1).Let Q ≥ N be the desired quadrature exactness degree and set 

MQ := 2Q + 1. (60) Define the centered MQ-point grid in each coordinate by 

IQ := {− Q, . . . , Q}d, GQ :=

 jMQ

: j ∈ I Q



⊂ [−1/2, 1/2 )d. (61) The signed label j ∈ {− Q, . . . , Q} is stored in the standard residue-class bin j mod MQ ∈ { 0, . . . , MQ −

1}. More precisely, for r ∈ {− Q, . . . , Q} define the centered computational-basis label by 

|r⟩c := |r mod MQ⟩std .We suppress the subscript c below. This is only a signed interpretation of the standard computa-tional basis. Let EN,Q denote the corresponding frequency embedding, 

EN,Q |n⟩ = |n⟩ , n ∈ B N . (62) Because Q ≥ N, every frequency in BN has a distinct centered label. Define the centered MQ-point QFT by 

FMQ,c |r⟩ = 1

pMQQ

# ∑

> s=−Q

e−2πirs /MQ |s⟩ , r ∈ {− Q, . . . , Q}. (63) The phase depends only on the residue classes of r and s modulo MQ, so FMQ,c is the QFT over 

ZMQ under the centered labeling above. For circuit compilation, embed this MQ-dimensional logical register in ⌈log 2 MQ⌉ qubits and extend the transform arbitrarily on the unused computational-basis states. Although MQ is gen-erally not a power of two, standard arbitrary-modulus QFT constructions approximate FMQ,c to operator error ϵtr /d using poly (log MQ, log (d/ϵtr )) elementary gates. The telescoping product in-equality then bounds the error of the d-fold transform by ϵtr , without changing the O(d log MQ)

qubit count. The inverse padded QFT gives the weighted samples 

 (F†

> MQ,c

)⊗d EN,Qc 

> j

= 1

Md/2 

> Q

# ∑

> n∈B N

cne2πin ·j/MQ , j ∈ I Q, (64) which is M−d/2  

> Q

times the value of the represented Fourier polynomial at the node xj = j/MQ.For completeness, this isometry can be embedded into a unitary (via dilation) as follows. Let a source register C hold the compact label k ∈ { 0, . . . , 2 N}d, corresponding to frequency n = k − N1,and initialize a padded register R to |0⟩R. Reversible modular arithmetic implements: 

Uemb |0⟩R |k⟩C = |k − N1⟩R |0⟩C , (65) where the frequency on the right is stored in the centered convention. 27 Extending this injection register-wise and applying the inverse QFT gives the unitary 

UT 

> W

:=  (F†

> MQ,c

)⊗d ⊗ IC

Uemb . (66) For |ψ⟩C = ∑k∈{ 0,...,2 N}d ck |k⟩C, its action is 

UT 

> W

|0⟩R |ψ⟩C = ∑

> j∈I Q

"

1

Md/2 

> Q

# ∑

> k

cke2πi(k−N1)·j/MQ

#

|j⟩R |0⟩C . (67) Thus UT 

> W

is a unitary dilation of the weighted evaluation isometry W in (17). It uses one MQ-point QFT in each coordinate together with arithmetic polynomial in d and log MQ = O(log (Q + 1)) .The centered grid has exactly the quadrature exactness needed by the general oversampling result. Indeed, for p ∈ Zd with ∥p∥∞ < MQ,1

MdQ

# ∑

> j∈I Q

e2πip ·j/MQ =

(

1, p = 0, 0, p̸ = 0. (68) For ϕ, ψ ∈ V Q, every frequency in ϕψ has infinity norm at most 2 Q < MQ. Consequently, the rule with nodes GQ and weights M−dQ is Q-exact in the inner-product sense of the general framework, and JQ = MdQ. Therefore the hypothesis of Corollary 3.6 is satisfied whenever 

Q ≥ N + K. (69) Our main contribution here is to improve the number of grid points required by the dis-crete quantum algorithm. The cost of simulation then follows from plugging this choice of N

in [Cha+26, Theorem 4.4]. However, we will also include a theorem for completeness. 

Theorem 3.8 (Improved discretization for quantum simulation on the torus) . Let g : Td → R be a real-valued L g-Lipschitz function, and consider the evolution i∂tΦ(t) = [ −a(t)∆ + b(t)g(x)] Φ(t), Φ(0) ∈ V L0 , ∥Φ(0)∥ = 1, t ∈ [0, T]. (70) 

Let h : Td → R be a nonzero real-valued L h-Lipschitz function. Fix 0 < ϵ < 1 and define B 1 :=

R T 

> 0

|b(t)| dt. Then there is a quadrature degree Q for which the centered grid GQ in (61) contains M :=

2Q + 1 nodes per coordinate, with M = O L0 +

"

1 +

√d

ϵ max 



Lg B1, Lh

∥h∥∞

#

(1 + B1 ∥g∥∞ + log (1/ ϵ)) 

!

. (71) 

The resulting M d-point grid supports an O(d log M)-qubit finite-dimensional evolution with initial state 

|Ψ(0)⟩ = M−d/2 ∑ 

> xj∈G Q

Φ(0, xj) |j⟩ . (72) 

Let Mh denote multiplication by h on L 2(Td), and define the sampled diagonal observable 

bhGQ := ∑ 

> xj∈G Q

h(xj) |j⟩⟨ j| . (73) 

The final grid state satisfies 

⟨Ψ(T)|bhGQ |Ψ(T)⟩ − ⟨ Φ(T)|Mh|Φ(T)⟩ ≤ 4 ∥h∥∞ ϵ. (74) 28 Proof. Fix 

m :=

&

max 

(

2, 6Lg B1

√d

ϵ , 6Lh

√d

ϵ ∥h∥∞

)' 

,

q := ⌈max {2eB 1 ∥g∥∞ , 3 + log 2(1/ ϵ)}⌉ ,and set 

K := 2(m − 1), N := L0 + ( q − 1)K.Set Q := N + K and M := 2Q + 1. These choices fix all cutoff and grid parameters used below. Finite Fourier polynomials satisfy the slow spectral growth property (27). Define 

gK = Jm,d ∗Td g, hK = Jm,d ∗Td h.Lemma 3.7 shows that gK, hK ∈ V K and that 

∥g − gK ∥∞ ≤ 3Lg

√dm , ∥h − hK ∥∞ ≤ 3Lh

√dm ,while positivity and normalization of the Jackson kernel imply 

∥gK ∥∞ ≤ ∥ g∥∞ , ∥hK ∥∞ ≤ ∥ h∥∞ .The fixed value of m therefore controls both approximation errors simultaneously: 2B1 ∥g − gK ∥∞ ≤ ϵ, 2 ∥h − hK ∥∞ ≤ ∥ h∥∞ ϵ.The fixed value of q implies 

q ≥ 2eB 1 ∥gK ∥∞ , 22−q ≤ ϵ

2 , 23−q ≤ ϵ.By construction, Q = N + K, so (69) holds. Moreover, M = 2Q + 1 makes the centered grid 

Q-exact by (68), and 

M = 2Q + 1 = 2(N + K) + 1 = 2L0 + 2qK + 1 ≤ 2L0 + 4qm + 1. Substituting the fixed values of m and q proves (71). Let SN be the coefficient-to-function unitary for VN and let 

WN,Q := ( F†

> M,c

)⊗d EN,Q

be the padded inverse QFT in (64). Define 

bgGQ := ∑ 

> xj∈G Q

g(xj) |j⟩⟨ j| .Evolve the coefficient state according to 

i∂t |c(t)⟩ =



a(t)DN + b(t)W† 

> T,N,Q

bgGQ WT,N,Q



|c(t)⟩ , |c(0)⟩ = S† 

> N

Φ(0),29 and set |Ψ(t)⟩ := WT,N,Q |c(t)⟩. Since N ≤ Q and the grid is Q-exact, the padded inverse QFT is an isometry on the retained coefficient space. Equation (64) therefore gives the initial grid encoding in the theorem. The coefficient register and the Md-point grid workspace use O(d log M) qubits. Apply Corollary 3.6 with f = g, fK = gK, and the observable proxy hK. Its observable estimate gives 

⟨Ψ(T)|bhGQ |Ψ(T)⟩ − ⟨ Φ(T)|Mh|Φ(T)⟩

≤ 4B1 ∥hK ∥∞ ∥g − gK ∥∞ + 23−q ∥hK ∥∞ + 2 ∥h − hK ∥∞

≤ 2 ∥h∥∞ ϵ + ∥h∥∞ ϵ + ∥h∥∞ ϵ = 4 ∥h∥∞ ϵ.Theorem 3.8 should be compared with Theorem 4.8 and Lemma 4.7 of [Cha+26], which to-gether provide the discretization guarantees used by its main simulation theorem [Cha+26, The-orem 4.2]. The first of those results proves L2-closeness between the Fourier interpolant of the collocation evolution and the continuum solution. Because the collocation grid also fixes the re-tained Fourier band, its proof controls dynamical aliasing through high-order Sobolev norms of the evolving wavefunction. Bounding those norms for a Lipschitz potential requires mollification and a Sobolev-growth estimate, and leads in general to a grid resolution that is exponential in the dimension. Here the Jackson proxy is instead exactly band limited, and oversampling makes its quadrature potential identical to the Galerkin potential. The state error is therefore controlled only by the uniform proxy error and the tail of the Dyson series, with no Sobolev-norm estimate for the evolved wavefunction, yielding a grid resolution polynomial in the dimension under the assumptions of the theorem. The expectation-value comparison is simplified for the same reason. The general expectation-error lemma of [Cha+26] contains, in addition to the state error, a Riemann-summation error in-volving sup ∇| ΦM|2 

> ∞

and a Fourier-tail term involving |Φ|H1 /M. Obtaining an end-to-end guarantee requires bounding these wavefunction-dependent quantities, and the generic estimate sup ∇| ΦM|2 

> ∞

= O(Md+1) contributes to the large grid requirement. In the present anal-ysis, the observable proxy hK is band limited and the oversampled rule integrates hK | eΨ|2 ex-actly The observable error therefore reduces to the state error and the uniform approximation error ∥h − hK ∥∞; no separate Riemann-summation or density-gradient estimate is needed. The Hamiltonian-simulation primitive, and hence its oracle-query bound, may still be taken from [Cha+26, Theorem 4.4]; the improvement is in the discretization and qubit requirements. For concreteness, we present an improved version of Theorem [Cha+26, Theorem 4.2] using our new discretization result. The torus case is equivalent to their periodic boundary conditions case. The case without periodic boundary conditions can be handlded using the same δ low-leakage evolution assumption [Cha+26, Definition 4.5]. 

Theorem 3.9 (Digital interaction-picture simulation on the torus) . Let g : Td → R be real-valued and L g-Lipschitz, let h : Td → R be nonzero, real-valued, and L h-Lipschitz, and consider i∂tΦ(t) = [ −a(t)∆ + b(t)g]Φ(t), Φ(0) ∈ V L0 , ∥Φ(0)∥ = 1. 

Assume a and b are piecewise C 1 and b has finitely many sign intervals. Fix 0 < ϵ < 1, put B 1 :=

R T 

> 0

|b(t)| dt, and let Λg ≥ max {1, ∥g∥∞}.

30 Then there are integers N ≤ Q and M = 2Q + 1 such that M = O L0 +

"

1 +

√d

ϵ max 



Lg B1, Lh

∥h∥∞

#

[1 + B1 ∥g∥∞ + log (1/ ϵ)] 

!

.

Writing IQ = {− Q, . . . , Q}d, let S N be the Fourier coefficient map and W T,N,Q as above. Assume coherent circuits can prepare S † 

> N

Φ(0) to error ϵprep ≤ c0ϵ, query g (j/M) through a binary oracle O g to error 

0 < ϵg ≤ Λg with B 1ϵg ≤ c0ϵ at a cost of Cg gates, and, for every requested 0 < δ < 1, implement a unitary dilation eUT 

> W

of W T,N,Q, the schedule arithmetic, and the Fourier kinetic phases to operator error δ

using d polylog (dM /δ) gates per use. Here c 0 > 0 is a sufficiently small universal constant, and state preparation uses Cprep gates and Qprep work qubits. Then there is a quantum circuit producing a normalized coefficient state |ec(T)⟩, with success probability at least 1 − O (ϵ), such that 

∥SN |ec(T)⟩ − Φ(T)∥ = O(ϵ). (75) 

On grid and coefficient registers R , C, define 

eΨQ(T)

E 

> RC

:= eUT

> W

 |0⟩R |ec(T)⟩C

, bhQ := ∑

> j∈I Q

h(j/M) |j⟩⟨ j|R

!

⊗ IC.

Then 

⟨ eΨQ(T)|bhQ| eΨQ(T)⟩ − ⟨ Φ(T)|h|Φ(T)⟩ = O(∥h∥∞ ϵ). (76) 

Let τg := Λg B1. The circuit makes Ng = O



(1 + τg) log (ee(1 + τg)/ϵ)

log log (ee(1 + τg)/ϵ)



= eO(1 + τg) (77) 

calls to O g or O † 

> g

and uses 

Cgates = Cprep + eO



(1 + τg)



d + Cg + log 2

 2Λg

ϵg

 

(78) 

elementary gates. Here eO suppresses logarithmic factors in d , M, (1 + τg)/ϵ and in the schedule arithmetic. The total qubit count is 

Qprep + O



d log M + log 2Λg

ϵg

+ polylog dM (1 + τg)

ϵ



. (79) 

Proof. Choose 

m =

&

max 

(

2, 6Lg B1

√d

ϵ , 6Lh

√d

ϵ ∥h∥∞

)' 

, K = 2(m − 1),

q = ⌈max {2eB 1 ∥g∥∞ , 3 + log 2(1/ ϵ)}⌉ , N = L0 + ( q − 1)K,and set Q = N + K and M = 2Q + 1. These choices give the grid bound in the statement. Define 

bgQ := ∑

> j∈I Q

g(j/M) |j⟩⟨ j| , DN |n⟩ = 4π2 ∥n∥22 |n⟩ ,31 and let the exact coefficient state solve 

i∂t |cN,Q(t)⟩ =

h

a(t)DN + b(t)W† 

> T,N,Q

bgQWT,N,Q

i

|cN,Q(t)⟩ , |cN,Q(0)⟩ = S† 

> N

Φ(0).The centered character sum shows that this coefficient evolution is the oversampled Fourier– Galerkin evolution. If gK = Jm,d ∗Td g and hK = Jm,d ∗Td h, Jackson smoothing and the Dyson-tail estimate give sup 

> 0≤t≤T

∥SN |cN,Q(t)⟩ − Φ(t)∥ ≤ 2B1 ∥g − gK ∥∞ + 22−q ≤ 32 ϵ. (80) They also give the ideal sampled-observable estimate 

⟨ΨQ(T)|bhQ|ΨQ(T)⟩ − ⟨ Φ(T)|h|Φ(T)⟩ ≤ 4 ∥h∥∞ ϵ, |ΨQ(T)⟩ = WT,N,Q |cN,Q(T)⟩ . (81) Choose all padded-QFT, kinetic-phase, and schedule subroutines to operator error at most 

δ = Θ

 ϵ log log (ee(1 + τg)/ϵ)(1 + τg) log (ee(1 + τg)/ϵ)



,with a sufficiently small implied constant. The arbitrary-modulus QFT construction supplies the synthesized dilation eUT 

> W

assumed in the theorem; write UT 

> W

for its ideal unitary dilation of WT,N,Q.To encode the sampled potential, query Og, reversibly clamp the returned value to [−Λg, Λg],compute a single-qubit rotation whose clean amplitude is eg(xj)/Λg, and uncompute the value register. This uses two calls to Og or O† 

> g

and O(log 2(2Λg/ϵg) + log 2(1/ δ)) gates, apart from the or-acle cost. Conjugating this sampled-value block by the implemented forward and inverse padded QFTs block encodes W† 

> T,N,Q

bgQWT,N,Q with unnormalized operator error at most ϵg + O(Λgδ).Move to the kinetic frame generated by a(t)DN and rescale time using d σ = Λg|b(t)| dt. The rescaled evolution lasts for τg = Λg B1 and has a norm-one interaction Hamiltonian. On each sign interval of b, a time-controlled interaction-picture query consists of the compressed-potential block surrounded by the controlled kinetic phases; intervals on which b = 0 are omitted. The access assumptions supply the sign of b, the inverse time conversion, and the controlled phases. The rescaled truncated-Dyson interaction-picture algorithm [LW18; Ber+20] simulates this evo-lution to operator error O(ϵ), with failure probability O(ϵ), using the number of time-controlled queries in (77). Returning to the Schr ¨ odinger picture requires one final kinetic phase. Each interaction-picture query contains one sampled-potential block and hence two binary-oracle calls, one forward padded QFT, one inverse padded QFT, and two controlled kinetic phases. This proves (77). Regard the synthesized transform sandwich as an exact block encoding of a nearby com-pressed Hamiltonian. Duhamel’s formula contributes B1ϵg + O(τgδ) from this Hamiltonian per-turbation, while the hybrid argument over the time-controlled queries contributes another O(ϵ)

from kinetic-phase and schedule synthesis. By the choice of δ, the truncated-Dyson, oracle, trans-form, kinetic, and schedule errors therefore sum to O(ϵ). Initial-state preparation adds at most 

ϵprep by unitarity, so 

∥| ec(T)⟩ − | cN,Q(T)⟩∥ = O(ϵ).Combining this with (80) proves (75). 32 At readout, applying eUT 

> W

instead of UT 

> W

adds at most δ in state norm. The ideal joint readout state is 

|ΨQ(T)⟩RC :=  WT,N,Q |cN,Q(T)⟩ 

> R

|0⟩C .Together with the coefficient estimate above, this gives 

eΨQ(T)

E 

> RC

− | ΨQ(T)⟩RC = O(ϵ).Then 

|⟨ v|bhQ|v⟩ − ⟨ w|bhQ|w⟩| ≤ 2 ∥h∥∞ ∥| v⟩ − | w⟩∥ .Combining this inequality with (81) proves (76). The compiled padded QFT has per-transform cost d polylog (dM /δ) at the chosen value of δ.The assumed schedule and kinetic-phase cost is polylogarithmic at the same tolerance. Multiply-ing the per-query cost by (77), and adding state preparation and final readout, gives (78). The transform registers, binary value register, truncated-Dyson time and order registers, and reusable schedule and kinetic workspace give (79). 

3.3 Positive orthant (and its invertible affine images) with log-barrier metrics 

Here we will consider the setting of simulating the Schr ¨ odinger equation constrained a d-dimensional polyhedron P defined a by Ax ≤ b, where A is invertible. The associated metric with be the Hes-sian metric induced by the log-barrier function 

ΦP (x) = −

> d

# ∑

> j=1

log (bj − [Ax ]j).Since A is invertible we can switch to a coordinate system y = A−1(x + b), where the constrain becomes a positivity one on x, i.e. remaining in the positive orthant of Rd.The standard log barrier function (for the positive othant) is 

Φ(x) = −

> d

# ∑

> j=1

log xj, x ∈ (0, ∞)d.Here, we choose the manifold M to be the positive orthant (0, ∞)d and the metric to be g(x) = 

∇2Φ(x). The corresponding Laplace–Beltrami operator is 

∆g =

> d

# ∑

> i=1

(xi∂i)2. (82) Under the coordinate change yi = log xi, the metric becomes Euclidean and (82) becomes the ordinary Laplacian on Rd. This is due to the property of the log barrier: D log (x)⊤ D log (x) = 

∇2Φ(x).The operator on the full orthant has continuous spectrum, and an infinite domain cannot be represented by a finite digital register. We consider a truncated orthant for two reasons: (1) the above does not have a point spectrum and (2) because we cannot digitally encode the infinite 33 orthant. We therefore restrict to [r−, r+]d, where 0 < r− < r+ < ∞. A self-adjoint realization on this compact box remains unbounded but has compact resolvent. We now derive the form of the Riemannian Schr ¨ odinger equation after the co-ordinate change and truncation. Set μ := ( log r− + log r+)/2 and ℓ := log (r+/r−). Rescaling the logarithmic box to S = [ −1/2, 1/2 ]d by y = μ1 + ℓw we have the Schr ¨ odinger equation 

i∂t eΨ(t, w) = 



− a(t)

ℓ2 ∆ + b(t) ef (w)

eΨ(t, w), ef (w) := f



eμ+ℓw1 , . . . , eμ+ℓwd



. (83) If f is Gf -Lipschitz on [r−, r+]d, then ef is at most r+ℓGf -Lipschitz on S. The same statement holds for an observable h with Lipschitz constant Gh. In order to apply the simulation for the torus, we assume that ef and eh have periodic extensions with these Lipschitz bounds. If A ∈ Rd×d is invertible and c ∈ Rd, then the metric for the log barrier 

ΦA,c(x) := −

> d

# ∑

> j=1

log (Ax − c)j

is given by 

g(x) = ∇2ΦA,c(x) = AT diag  (Ax − c)−21 , . . . , (Ax − c)−2

> d

 A. (84) Through the change of coordinates z = Ax − c, with inverse x = A−1(z + c), we arrive back at the orthant case. Fix 0 < r− < r+ < ∞ and let P := {x ∈ Rd : r−1 ≤ Ax − c ≤ r+1}. Call a continuous function v on P face-compatible if v(A−1(z + c)) takes the same value at zi = r− and zi = r+ for every i and every fixed choice of the other coordinates. Equivalently, its pullback to S descends to a continuous function on the quotient torus. The face compatibility condition can potentially be alleviated using a similar leakage condition [Cha+26, Definition 4.5]. The authors used this condition tackle issues that come with the potential not being continuous on the Torus. Let ∆per  

> g

denote the self-adjoint realization obtained by identifying these face pairs in logarith-mic affine coordinates. This operator remains unbounded but has compact resolvent. For n ∈ Zd,define 

YP 

> n

(x) := ℓ−d/2 exp 

 2πi

ℓ n · [log (Ax − c) − μ1]



, V P 

> N

:= span 

n

YP 

> n

: ∥n∥∞ ≤ N

o

. (85) 

Corollary 3.10 (Discretization on a truncated log-barrier polyhedron) . Equip P with the metric g =

∇2ΦA,c in (84) . Let f : P → R be bounded, real-valued, face-compatible, and G f -Lipschitz in Euclidean distance. Consider i∂tψ(t) = −a(t)∆per  

> g

+ b(t) f  ψ(t), ψ(0) ∈ V P 

> L0

, ∥ψ(0)∥L2(P, d vol g ) = 1, (86) 

for t ∈ [0, T]. Let h : P → R be bounded, nonzero, real-valued, face-compatible, and G h-Lipschitz in Euclidean distance. Fix 0 < ϵ < 1 and define B 1 := R T 

> 0

|b(t)| dt. Then there is a quadrature degree Q and an M d-point grid GP,Q ⊂ P , with M := 2Q + 1 nodes along each transformed coordinate, where M = O

L0 +

1 + r+ℓ A−1

> op

√d

ϵ max 



Gf B1, Gh

∥h∥∞

 (1 + B1 ∥ f ∥∞ + log (1/ ϵ)) 

 . (87) 34 This grid supports an O(d log M)-qubit finite-dimensional evolution with initial state 

|Ψ(0)⟩ =

 ℓ

M

d/2 

# ∑ 

> xj∈G P,Q

ψ(0, xj) |j⟩ . (88) 

Let Mh denote multiplication by h on L 2(P, d vol g), and define the sampled diagonal observable 

bhP,Q := ∑ 

> xj∈G P,Q

h(xj) |j⟩⟨ j| . (89) 

The final grid state satisfies 

⟨Ψ(T)|bhP,Q|Ψ(T)⟩ − ⟨ ψ(T)|Mh|ψ(T)⟩ ≤ 4 ∥h∥∞ ϵ. (90) 

The truncated positive orthant is the special case A = I and c = 0.Proof. Define 

Θ(w) := A−1 

eμ+ℓw1 , . . . , eμ+ℓwd



+ c



, (UΘψ)( w) := ℓd/2 ψ(Θ(w)) , w ∈ S.It follows from the definition of the metric that DΘ(w)T g(Θ(w)) DΘ(w) = ℓ2 I. Hence UΘ is unitary and 

UΘ(−∆per  

> g

)U† 

> Θ

= − 1

ℓ2 ∆.Conjugating (86) by UΘ produces the torus evolution with kinetic coefficient a(t)/ℓ2, potential 

ef := f ◦ Θ, and observable eh := h ◦ Θ. The face-compatibility assumptions make ef and eh periodic. Since ∥DΘ(w)∥op ≤ r+ℓ A−1

> op

, their periodic extensions are Lipschitz with constants at most 

r+ℓ A−1 

> op

Gf and r+ℓ A−1 

> op

Gh. Moreover, UΘVP 

> L0

= VL0 by (85). Applying Theorem 3.8 and setting GP,Q := Θ(GQ) proves (87) and gives the stated initial state because (UΘψ)( wj) = 

ℓd/2 ψ(Θ(wj)) . Finally, Θ is a bijection up to boundary points of measure zero, so the sup norms and continuum expectation values are preserved. We have the following simulation resource estimates for the positive orthant and invertible affine images. 

Theorem 3.11 (Digital simulation on a truncated positive orthant and its invertible affine images) .

Let A ∈ Rd×d be invertible, c ∈ Rd, 0 < r− < r+, and 

P = {x ∈ Rd : r−1 ≤ Ax − c ≤ r+1}, ℓ = log (r+/r−), μ = 12 (log r− + log r+).

Equip P with g(x) = AT diag  (Ax − c)−21 , . . . , (Ax − c)−2

> d

 Aand periodic boundary conditions obtained by identifying opposite faces in the coordinates log (Ax − c).Let f , h : P → R be bounded, real-valued, face-compatible, respectively G f - and G h-Lipschitz in Euclidean distance, with h ̸ = 0, and consider i∂tψ(t) = −a(t)∆per  

> g

+ b(t) f  ψ(t), ∥ψ(0)∥L2(P, d vol g ) = 1. 35 Assume a , b are piecewise C 1 and b has finitely many sign intervals. Fix 0 < ϵ < 1, put B 1 = R T 

> 0

|b(t)| dt, and choose Λ f ≥ max {1, ∥ f ∥∞}.For coefficients indexed by ∥n∥∞ ≤ N, define the log-affine Fourier reconstruction by 

(RP,N c)( x) := ℓ−d/2 ∑ 

> ∥n∥∞≤N

cn exp 

 2πi

ℓ n · [log (Ax − c) − μ1]



.

Suppose ψ(0) ∈ Ran (RP,L0 ). Then there are integers N ≤ Q and M = 2Q + 1 such that M = O

L0 +

1 + r+ℓ A−1

> op

√d

ϵ max 



Gf B1, Gh

∥h∥∞

 [1 + B1 ∥ f ∥∞ + log (1/ ϵ)] 

 .

Writing IQ = {− Q, . . . , Q}d, set xj := A−1

eμ1+ℓj/M + c



, WP,N,Q |n⟩ := M−d/2 ∑

> j∈I Q

e2πin ·j/M |j⟩ .

Assume coherent circuits can prepare R∗P,N ψ(0) to error ϵprep ≤ c0ϵ, query f (xj) through a binary oracle Of to error 0 < ϵ f ≤ Λ f with B 1ϵ f ≤ c0ϵ at a cost of C f gates and Q f work qubits, including reversible evaluation and uncomputation of x j, and implement a unitary dilation eUP 

> W

of W P,N,Q, the schedule arith-metic, and the log-affine kinetic phases to requested operator error 0 < η < 1 using d polylog (dM /η)

gates per use. Here c 0 > 0 is a sufficiently small universal constant, while state preparation uses Cprep 

gates and Qprep work qubits. Then there is a quantum circuit producing a normalized coefficient state |ec(T)⟩, with success probability at least 1 − O (ϵ), such that 

∥R P,N |ec(T)⟩ − ψ(T)∥L2(P, d vol g ) = O(ϵ). (91) 

On grid and coefficient registers R , C, define 

eΨP,Q(T)

E 

> RC

:= eUP

> W

 |0⟩R |ec(T)⟩C

, bhP,Q := ∑

> j∈I Q

h(xj) |j⟩⟨ j|R

!

⊗ IC.

Then 

⟨ eΨP,Q(T)|bhP,Q| eΨP,Q(T)⟩ − ⟨ ψ(T)|h|ψ(T)⟩ = O(∥h∥∞ ϵ). (92) 

Let τf = Λ f B1. The circuit makes Nf = O



(1 + τf ) log (ee(1 + τf )/ϵ)

log log (ee(1 + τf )/ϵ)



= eO(1 + τf ) (93) 

calls to O f or O † 

> f

and uses 

Cprep + eO



(1 + τf )



d + C f + log 2

 2Λ f

ϵ f

 

(94) 

elementary gates. The total qubit count is 

Qprep + Q f + O



d log M + log 2Λ f

ϵ f

+ polylog dM (1 + τf )

ϵ



. (95) 36 Proof. Define 

Θ(w) := A−1

eμ1+ℓw + c



, (U φ)( w) := ℓd/2 φ(Θ(w)) .Then U : L2(P, d vol g) → L2(Td) is unitary, 

U (−∆per  

> g

)U ∗ = − 1

ℓ2 ∆,and the explicit reconstruction in the statement satisfies 

(U R P,N c)( w) = ∑ 

> ∥n∥∞≤N

cne2πin ·w.Thus the coefficient labels are the ordinary torus Fourier labels. The pulled-back potential ef = f ◦ Θ and observable eh = h ◦ Θ are periodic and have Lipschitz constants at most r+ℓ A−1 

> op

Gf and r+ℓ A−1 

> op

Gh. Applying Theorem 3.9 to 

i∂t(U ψ) = 



− a(t)

ℓ2 ∆ + b(t) ef



(U ψ)

gives the stated N, Q, M and all state, query, gate, qubit, and success probability bounds. A po-tential query at j/M is implemented by computing xj = A−1(eμ1+ℓj/M + c), querying Of , and uncomputing xj. The kinetic phase is exp 



− 4π2i

ℓ2 ∥n∥22 

> Zt
> 0

a(s) ds



.Finally, WP,N,Q is the same padded Fourier evaluation isometry used for the pulled-back torus problem, and eh(j/M) = h(xj). Unitary invariance under U gives the state and observable esti-mates in the statement. 

3.4 ℓp balls with a Duffy metric 

We now consider simulation on ℓp balls. The cases p = 1 and p = 2 have familiar geometric descriptions: each orthant of the ℓ1 ball is a simplex, while the ℓ2 sphere carries the standard round metric. For p /∈ { 1, 2 }, there is no comparably distinguished metric adapted to the ℓp geometry with a known tractable eigenbasis. The metric inherited from the ambient Euclidean space is one possible choice, but the corresponding eigenfunctions are not known in closed form in general. We instead choose a metric that becomes Euclidean under the Duffy map. Schr ¨ odinger evolution on the resulting compact subsets of an ℓp ball and the upper half of an ℓp sphere then reduces to the now familiar evolution on the flat torus. Let p ≥ 2. This assumption makes the maps below at least C2 on every compact coordinate box used in the construction, which provides the regularity needed for the Laplace–Beltrami operators below. The open ℓp ball and the upper hemisphere of the ℓp sphere are 

Bdp :=

(

u ∈ Rd :

> d

# ∑

> k=1

|uk|p < 1

)

, Sdp,+ :=

(

u ∈ Rd+1 :

> d+1

# ∑

> k=1

|uk|p = 1, ud+1 > 0

)

. (96) 37 For x ∈ (−1, 1 )d, the Duffy map onto the upper hemisphere and its projection onto the ball are 

[Dsph  

> p

(x)] k := xk ∏

> j<k

(1 − | xj|p)1/ p, 1 ≤ k ≤ d, [Dsph  

> p

(x)] d+1 :=

> d

# ∏

> j=1

(1 − | xj|p)1/ p, (97) 

bDp(x) :=



[Dsph  

> p

(x)] 1, . . . , [Dsph  

> p

(x)] d



. (98) The identity ∑d+1 

> k=1

|[Dsph  

> p

(x)] k|p = 1 follows by telescoping. The map bDp is a bijection from (−1, 1 )d

onto Bdp, with inverse 

x1 = u1, xk = uk



1 − ∑j<k |uj|p

1/ p , 2 ≤ k ≤ d. (99) Since the last coordinate of a point in Sdp,+ is determined by the first d coordinates, Dsph  

> p

is also a bijection onto Sdp,+.The derivatives of these maps become unbounded near the boundary of (−1, 1 )d. Fix 0 < δ <

1, set rδ := 1 − δ and Cδ := [ −rδ, rδ]d, and restrict the maps to Cδ. Their images are 

Ωball  

> p,δ

:= bDp(Cδ), Ωsph  

> p,δ

:= Dsph  

> p

(Cδ). (100) This truncation restricts the coordinates in Cδ rather than the ℓp radius. In particular, Ωball  

> p,δ

need not be a smaller concentric ℓp ball. We place metrics on the two images by requiring the coordinate maps to be isometries: 

( bDp)∗ gball  

> p,δ

= Id, dμball  

> p,δ

:= ( bDp)# dx,

(Dsph  

> p

)∗ gsph  

> p,δ

= Id, dμsph  

> p,δ

:= ( Dsph  

> p

)# dx. (101) The metric induced from the ambient Euclidean space would instead pull back under either map 

F to DF T DF . The measures in (101) are the Riemannian volume measures of the metrics defined there. The coordinate maps therefore define unitaries 

Up,δ : L2(Ωball  

> p,δ

, d μball  

> p,δ

) → L2(Cδ, d x), (Up,δψ)( x) := ψ( bDp(x)) , (102) 

Usph  

> p,δ

: L2(Ωsph  

> p,δ

, d μsph  

> p,δ

) → L2(Cδ, d x), (Usph  

> p,δ

ψ)( x) := ψ(Dsph  

> p

(x)) . (103) For the projected image, we abbreviate Ωp,δ := Ωball  

> p,δ

and μp,δ := μball  

> p,δ

. When opposite faces of Cδ

are identified, the corresponding Laplace–Beltrami operator on Ωp,δ is defined by 

−∆per  

> Dp

:= U†

> p,δ

(−∆per  

> Cδ

)Up,δ. (104) The next bounds control the Lipschitz constants after the change of variables. 

Lemma 3.12 (Bounds for the two coordinate maps) . On C δ,

D bDp(x) op ≤ κball  

> p,δ

, (κball  

> p,δ

)2 := d + d(d − 1)

2

r2p

> δ

(1 − rp 

> δ

)2−2/ p , (105) 

DDsph  

> p

(x) op ≤ κsph  

> p,δ

, (κsph  

> p,δ

)2 := ( κball  

> p,δ

)2 + d r2p−2

> δ

(1 − rp 

> δ

)2−2/ p . (106) 38 Consequently, if v is G-Lipschitz in the ambient Euclidean distance on either image in (100) , then its pullback to C δ is κball  

> p,δ

G-Lipschitz for the ball and κsph  

> p,δ

G-Lipschitz for the upper hemisphere. Proof. The diagonal entries of D bDp(x) have magnitude at most one, and the entries below the diagonal satisfy 

∂[ bDp(x)] k

∂xj

≤ rp

> δ

(1 − rp 

> δ

)1−1/ p , j < k.The first bound follows from the Frobenius norm, since there are d diagonal entries and d(d − 1)/2 entries below the diagonal. The first d rows of DDsph  

> p

(x) are the same, while its last row satisfies 

∂[Dsph  

> p

(x)] d+1

∂xj

≤ rp−1

> δ

(1 − rp 

> δ

)1−1/ p .The second Frobenius-norm bound follows by adding these d entries. The Lipschitz estimates follow by integrating the differential bounds along line segments in the convex set Cδ and then composing with v.Set κp,δ := κball  

> p,δ

. We first impose periodic boundary conditions. Choose either F = bDp or 

F = Dsph  

> p

. For the projected map, set Ω = Ωball  

> p,δ

, μ = μball  

> p,δ

, U = Up,δ, and κ = κball  

> p,δ

. For the map onto the upper hemisphere, set Ω = Ωsph  

> p,δ

, μ = μsph  

> p,δ

, U = Usph  

> p,δ

, and κ = κsph  

> p,δ

. Identifying each pair of opposite faces of Cδ defines the periodic Laplacian −∆per  

> Cδ

. Its counterpart on Ω is 

−∆per  

> Ω

:= U†(−∆per  

> Cδ

)U.A continuous function v on Ω respects this identification when v ◦ F takes the same value at xi =

−rδ and xi = rδ for every i and every fixed choice of the remaining coordinates. Rescale Cδ to S = [ −1/2, 1/2 ]d by defining 

Θ(w) := F(2rδw), (U ψ)( w) := ( 2rδ)d/2 ψ(Θ(w)) .Then U : L2(Ω, d μ) → L2(Td) is unitary and 

U (−∆per  

> Ω

)U † = − 14r2

> δ

∆. (107) The corresponding Fourier modes on Ω are 

YΩ 

> n

(u) := ( 2rδ)−d/2 exp 

 πirδ

n · F−1(u)



, V Ω 

> N

:= span 

n

YΩ 

> n

: ∥n∥∞ ≤ N

o

. (108) They are orthonormal eigenfunctions of −∆per  

> Ω

, and U V Ω 

> N

= VN .

Corollary 3.13 (Discretization with periodic boundary conditions) . Use either choice of F and the accompanying notation above. Let f : Ω → R be bounded, real-valued, and G f -Lipschitz in the ambi-ent Euclidean distance, and assume that f ◦ F has matching values on every pair of opposite faces of C δ.Consider i∂tψ(t) = −a(t)∆per  

> Ω

+ b(t) f  ψ(t), ψ(0) ∈ V Ω 

> L0

, ∥ψ(0)∥L2(Ω, d μ) = 1, (109) 39 for t ∈ [0, T]. Let h : Ω → R be bounded, nonzero, real-valued, and G h-Lipschitz in the ambient Euclidean distance, and assume that h ◦ F also has matching values on opposite faces. Fix 0 < ϵ < 1 and define B1 := R T 

> 0

|b(t)| dt. Then there is a quadrature degree Q such that the grid GF,Q := Θ(GQ) ⊂ Ω contains Md points, where M := 2Q + 1 and M = O L0 +

"

1 + 2rδκ√d

ϵ max 



Gf B1, Gh

∥h∥∞

#

(1 + B1 ∥ f ∥∞ + log (1/ ϵ)) 

!

. (110) 

This grid supports an O(d log M)-qubit finite-dimensional evolution with initial state 

|Ψ(0)⟩ =

 2rδ

M

d/2 

# ∑ 

> uj∈G F,Q

ψ(0, uj) |j⟩ . (111) 

Let Mh denote multiplication by h on L 2(Ω, d μ), and define 

bhF,Q := ∑ 

> uj∈G F,Q

h(uj) |j⟩⟨ j| . (112) 

The final grid state satisfies 

⟨Ψ(T)|bhF,Q|Ψ(T)⟩ − ⟨ ψ(T)|Mh|ψ(T)⟩ ≤ 4 ∥h∥∞ ϵ. (113) 

Proof. Conjugating (109) by U and using (107) gives a torus evolution with potential ef := f ◦ Θ

and observable eh := h ◦ Θ. The matching boundary values make these functions continuous on 

Td. Lemma 3.12 shows that they are Lipschitz on the fundamental cube with constants at most 2rδκGf and 2 rδκGh. The same bounds hold in the torus distance: a shortest torus segment can be divided where it crosses a face, and each piece lifts to a segment in the fundamental cube. Eq. (108) shows that U ψ(0) ∈ VL0 . Theorem 3.8 now gives (110). At a node wj ∈ GQ,

(U ψ)( wj) = ( 2rδ)d/2 ψ(Θ(wj)) , which gives the initial state in (111). The coordinate change pre-serves the sup norms of f and h. Since U MhU † is multiplication by eh, it also preserves the contin-uum expectation value. The observable estimate in Theorem 3.8 therefore becomes (113). Corollary 3.13 applies to both images in (100) when the potential and observable have match-ing values on opposite coordinate faces. 

Theorem 3.14 (Digital simulation on a Duffy ℓp domain) . Let p ≥ 2, 0 < δ < 1, r δ = 1 − δ, and Cδ = [ −rδ, rδ]d. Let F : Cδ → Ω be either the projected Duffy map onto the coordinate-truncated ℓp

ball or the Duffy map onto the coordinate-truncated upper hemisphere. Equip Ω with the flat Duffy metric F∗ g = Id, Riemannian measure μ = F# dx, and periodic boundary conditions induced by identifying opposite faces of C δ. Set 

κ := sup 

> x∈Cδ

∥DF (x)∥op .

Let f , h : Ω → R be bounded, real-valued, respectively G f - and G h-Lipschitz, with h ̸ = 0, and suppose f ◦ F and h ◦ F have matching values on opposite faces. Consider i∂tψ(t) = −a(t)∆per  

> Ω

+ b(t) f  ψ(t), ∥ψ(0)∥L2(Ω, d μ) = 1. 40 Assume a , b are piecewise C 1 and b has finitely many sign intervals. Fix 0 < ϵ < 1, put B 1 = R T 

> 0

|b(t)| dt, and choose Λ f ≥ max {1, ∥ f ∥∞}.For coefficients indexed by ∥n∥∞ ≤ N, define the Duffy Fourier reconstruction explicitly by 

(RF,N c)( u) := ( 2rδ)−d/2 ∑ 

> ∥n∥∞≤N

cn exp 

 πirδ

n · F−1(u)



.

Suppose ψ(0) ∈ Ran (RF,L0 ). Then there are integers N ≤ Q and M = 2Q + 1 such that M = O L0 +

"

1 + 2rδκ√d

ϵ max 



Gf B1, Gh

∥h∥∞

#

[1 + B1 ∥ f ∥∞ + log (1/ ϵ)] 

!

.

Writing IQ = {− Q, . . . , Q}d, set uj := F(2rδ j/M), WF,N,Q |n⟩ := M−d/2 ∑

> j∈I Q

e2πin ·j/M |j⟩ .

Assume coherent circuits can prepare R∗ 

> F,N

ψ(0) to error ϵprep ≤ c0ϵ, query f (uj) through a binary oracle Of to error 0 < ϵ f ≤ Λ f with B 1ϵ f ≤ c0ϵ at a cost of C f gates and Q f work qubits, and implement a unitary dilation eUFW of W F,N,Q, the schedule arithmetic, and the Fourier kinetic phases to requested error 

0 < η < 1 using d polylog (dM /η) gates per use. Here c 0 > 0 is a sufficiently small universal constant, while state preparation uses Cprep gates and Qprep work qubits. Then there is a quantum circuit producing a normalized coefficient state |ec(T)⟩, with success probability at least 1 − O (ϵ), such that 

∥R F,N |ec(T)⟩ − ψ(T)∥L2(Ω, d μ) = O(ϵ). (114) 

On grid and coefficient registers R , C, define 

eΨF,Q(T)

E 

> RC

:= eUFW

 |0⟩R |ec(T)⟩C

, bhF,Q := ∑

> j∈I Q

h(uj) |j⟩⟨ j|R

!

⊗ IC.

Then 

⟨ eΨF,Q(T)|bhF,Q| eΨF,Q(T)⟩ − ⟨ ψ(T)|h|ψ(T)⟩ = O(∥h∥∞ ϵ). (115) 

Let τf := Λ f B1. The circuit makes Nf = O



(1 + τf ) log (ee(1 + τf )/ϵ)

log log (ee(1 + τf )/ϵ)



= eO(1 + τf ) (116) 

calls to O f or O † 

> f

and uses 

Cprep + eO



(1 + τf )



d + C f + log 2

 2Λ f

ϵ f

 

(117) 

elementary gates. The total qubit count is 

Qprep + Q f + O



d log M + log 2Λ f

ϵ f

+ polylog dM (1 + τf )

ϵ



. (118) 41 Proof. Define 

Θ(w) := F(2rδw), (U φ)( w) := ( 2rδ)d/2 φ(Θ(w)) .Then U : L2(Ω, d μ) → L2(Td) is unitary, 

U (−∆per  

> Ω

)U ∗ = − 14r2

> δ

∆,and the explicit reconstruction in the statement satisfies 

(U R F,N c)( w) = ∑ 

> ∥n∥∞≤N

cne2πin ·w.Thus the coefficient labels are exactly the ordinary torus Fourier labels. The pulled-back potential ef = f ◦ Θ and observable eh = h ◦ Θ are periodic and have Lips-chitz constants at most 2 rδκGf and 2 rδκGh. Applying the torus interaction-picture construction (Theorem 3.9) to 

i∂t(U ψ) = 



− a(t)

4r2

> δ

∆ + b(t) ef



(U ψ)

gives the stated N, Q, M and all state, query, gate, qubit, and success probability bounds. A poten-tial query at j/M is implemented by computing uj = F(2rδ j/M), querying Of , and uncomputing 

uj. The kinetic phase is exp 



− π2ir2

> δ

∥n∥22 

> Zt
> 0

a(s) ds



.Finally, WF,N,Q is the same padded Fourier evaluation isometry used for the pulled-back torus problem, and eh(j/M) = h(uj). Unitary invariance under U gives the state and observable esti-mates in the statement. 

3.5 Sphere with the standard metric 

We consider the sphere (without loss of generality unit sphere) with its natural Euclidean-inherited metric ga,b = δa,b − ya yb 

> r2

. This gives the usual spherical Laplacian ∆Sd . Thus, Hℓ is taken to be spanned by the degree ℓ spherical harmonics. In this subsection, {Yℓ,m : 1 ≤ m ≤ hℓ,d} denotes an orthonormal basis in L2(Sd, d Sd), where d Sd is ordinary Riemannian area measure. Then 

−∆Sd Yℓ,m = λℓ,dYℓ,m, (119) 

λℓ,d = ℓ(ℓ + d − 1), (120) 

hℓ,d =

ℓ + dd



−

ℓ + d − 2

d



= (2ℓ + d − 1)( ℓ + d − 2)!

ℓ!(d − 1)! . (121) Let Pℓ(Rd+1) be the homogeneous polynomials of degree ℓ. Using the notation Section 3 the level function L maps Yℓ,m to ℓ. The spaces Hℓ and VN are defined using the labeling defined by L.Specifically, Hℓ is the space of spherical harmonics with degree ℓ.The spherical harmonics on the unit sphere satisfy the Fischer decomposition: 

Pℓ = Hℓ ⊕ ∥ x∥2Pℓ−2 = Hℓ ⊕ P ℓ−2.42 Recursing the above gives Pℓ ⊆ V ℓ. Since Hℓ1 · H ℓ2 ⊆ P ℓ1+ℓ2 , the above implies the eigenfunctions of ∆Sd satisfy the slow spectral growth in (27). The natural smoothing procedure for functions on the sphere expressed in the spherical har-monics basis is the multi-dimensional heat kernel. Recall the multi-dimensional heat semigroup: 

Ft = Pt F = et∆Sd F = ∑

> ℓ,m

e−tλℓ,d bFℓ,mYℓ,m.The heat-kernel smoothed function satisfies the following guarantees. 

Lemma 3.15. Let F : Sd → R be bounded and geodesically G-Lipschitz. Let F t be F evolved under the heat kernel for time t > 0. Then 

∥Ft − F∥∞ ≤ G min {π, √2dt }. (122) 

Additionally, for K ≥ max 



d,

q d−12t



,

∥(I − PK )Ft∥∞ ≤ ∥ F∥

 2d−1Γ(d/2 )(d − 1)!

1/2 

t−d/4 e−tK 2/2 . (123) 

Proof. We will start by representing the heat-evolved function Ft as Ex[F(Xt)] , X0 = x where Xt is the spherical Brownian motion evolved for time t from 0 with generator ∆Sd . Fix x and write 

r(y) = dg(x, y) ∈ [0, π]. (124) Then Jensen’s and geodesic Lipschitzness imply that: 

|Ft(x) − F(x)| ≤ Ex |F(Xt) − F(x)| ≤ GExr(Xt).Thus, the goal of the first part of the proof will be to show Exr(Xt) ≤ min {π, √2dt }.Since r is time-independent and r(x) = 0, if r were sufficiently regular, then Ito’s formula and taking expectation gives 

Ex [r(Xt)] = Ex 

> Zt
> 0

(∆Sr)( Xs)ds . (125) Near x, we choose the local coordinate system 

y(r, ϑ) = cos (r) x + sin (r) ϑ, ϑ ∈ TxSd, ∥ϑ∥ = 1. (126) This gives the metric 

g = dr2 + sin 2 r g Sd−1 ,

q

|g| = sin d−1 r

q

|gSd−1 |.Thus for a purely r-dependent function f (r(y)) , the radial Laplacian acts as 

∆Sd ( f ◦ r) = 1sin d−1(r)

ddr 



sin d−1(r) f ′(r)



= f ′′ (r) + ( d − 1) cot r f ′(r),where r(y) computes the r component of y.43 Taking f (r) = r yields 

∆r = ( d − 1) cot r, 0 < r < π. (127) Taking instead f (r) = r2, so that f ′(r) = 2r and f ′′ (r) = 2, gives directly 

∆r2 = 2r∆r + 2 |∇ r|2 = 2 + 2(d − 1)r cot r ≤ 2d, (128) where the inequality follows from r cot r ≤ 1 on r ∈ [−π, π].We would like to apply (125) r2, however it fails to be differentiable at the antipod −x, and thus is not sufficiently regular for It ˆ o’s lemma. Hence we apply the following smoothing argument and pass to the limit to use It ˆ o’s lemma. Fix 0 < η < π/4. Choose a nonincreasing cutoff χη ∈ C∞([ 0, π]) satisfying 0 ≤ χη ≤ 1, χη (r) = 1 for 0 ≤ r ≤ π − 2η, χη (r) = 0 for π − η ≤ r ≤ π. (129) Define 

fη (r) =  

> Zr
> 0

2sχη (s) ds, Φη (y) = fη (dg(x, y)) = fη (r(y)) . (130) Near r = 0, fη (r) = r2, so Φη is smooth at x in normal coordinates. Near r = π, fη is constant, so Φη is also smooth at the antipode. It is smooth elsewhere because r is smooth away from those two points. Hence Φη ∈ C∞(Sd).The first two derivatives of fη are 

f ′ 

> η

(r) = 2rχη (r) ≥ 0, f ′′  

> η

(r) = 2χη (r) + 2rχ′ 

> η

(r) ≤ 2, (131) using χ′ 

> η

≤ 0. For a radial function f (r) on the sphere, quote the radial Laplacian formula 

∆( f (r)) = f ′′ (r) + ( d − 1) cot r f ′(r). (132) On 0 < r ≤ π − 2η, fη (r) = r2, so (128) gives ∆Φ η ≤ 2d. On the transition region r ≥ π − 2η >

π/2, one has cot r ≤ 0 and f ′ 

> η

(r) ≥ 0. Substituting (131) into (132) therefore gives 

∆Φ η = f ′′  

> η

(r) + ( d − 1) cot r f ′ 

> η

(r) ≤ f ′′  

> η

(r) ≤ 2 ≤ 2d. (133) Thus 

∆Φ η (y) ≤ 2d for every y ∈ Sd. (134) We now apply Ito’s Lemma with Φη instead of r2. The starting value is Φη (x) = fη (0) = 0gives: 

Ex[ fη (r(Xt))] = Ex 

> Zt
> 0

(∆Φ η )( Xs) ds

≤ 

> Zt
> 0

2d ds = 2dt . (135) It remains to remove the approximation. Consider the limit η ↓. From (130), 0 ≤ r2 − fη (r) =  

> Zr
> 0

2s(1 − χη (s)) ds ≤ 

> Zππ−2η

2s ds ≤ 4πη . (136) 44 Therefore fη (r) → r2 uniformly on [0, π]. Using this in Eq. (135) and exchanging limit with expc-tation gives 

Exr(Xt)2 ≤ 2dt . (137) For the second part of the Lemma, we quote its pointwise expansion: 

(I − PK )Ft(x) = ∑

> ℓ> Khℓ,d

# ∑

> m=1

e−tλℓ,d bFℓ,mYℓ,m(x). (138) Apply Cauchy–Schwarz to this sum with first factor bFℓ,m and second factor e−tλℓ,d Yℓ,m(x). This gives 

|(I − PK )Ft(x)|2 ≤ ∑

> ℓ> K

# ∑

> m

| bFℓ,m|2

!

# ∑

> ℓ> K

# ∑

> m

e−2tλℓ,d |Yℓ,m(x)|2

!

≤ ∥F∥2  

> L2(dSd)

|Sd| ∑

> ℓ> K

hℓ,de−2tλℓ,d . (139) The second line uses Parseval’s identity and the addition formula for area-normalized spherical harmonics, 

# ∑

> m

|Yℓ,m(x)|2 = hℓ,d

|Sd| .Together with ∥F∥L2( dSd ) ≤ | Sd|1/2 ∥F∥∞, the area factors cancel. Taking square roots and the supremum over x proves: 

∥(I − PK )Ft∥∞ ≤ ∥ F∥∞ Hd(K, t),where 

Hd(K, t) :=

" ∞

# ∑

> ℓ=K+1

hℓ,de−2tλℓ,d

#1/2 

. (140) To obtain the closed tail, first quote the multiplicity formula 

hℓ,d = (2ℓ + d − 1)( ℓ + d − 2)!

ℓ!(d − 1)! . (141) When ℓ ≥ d, bound 2 ℓ + d − 1 ≤ 3ℓ and each of the d − 2 factors in (ℓ + d − 2)!/ ℓ! by 2 ℓ. This yields the convenient envelope hℓ,d ≤ 2dℓd−1/(d − 1)!. Also quote 

λℓ,d = ℓ(ℓ + d − 1) ≥ ℓ2. (142) Substitution into (140) gives 

Hd(K, t)2 ≤ 2d

(d − 1)! ∑

> ℓ> K

ℓd−1e−2tℓ2

. (143) 45 The derivative of xd−1e−2tx 2

has the sign of (d − 1) − 4tx 2. Thus the condition K ≥ p(d − 1)/(2t)

is more than sufficient to make it decreasing for x ≥ K. For ℓ > K, split the exponential as 

e−2tℓ2

= e−tℓ2

e−tℓ2

≤ e−tK 2

e−tℓ2

. (144) By an integral bound for the series then gives, 

# ∑

> ℓ> K

ℓd−1e−2tℓ2

≤ e−tK 2

Z ∞

> 0

xd−1e−tx 2

dx (145) 

= 12 t−d/2 Γ(d/2 )e−tK 2

. (146) Inserting this into (143), the coefficient is 2d

(d − 1)! · 12 Γ(d/2 ) = A2

> d

. (147) Taking square roots gives 

Hd(K, t) ≤

s

2d

(d − 1)! · 12 Γ(d/2 )t−d/4 e−tK 2/2 ,as desired. The following corollary using the above to show that the projected heat kernel smoothed func-tion can be made arbitrarily close to the original function, while remaining band-limited. 

Corollary 3.16 (Spherical Heat Kernel Smoother) . Suppose b ∈ L1(0, T; R), put B 1 = R T 

> 0

|b(t)| dt >

0, and let F : Sd → R be bounded and geodesically G-Lipschitz. For 0 < ϵ < 1, if t ϵ = ϵ2 

> 72 dG 2B21

and Kϵ = Ω (dGB 1 log (dG ∥F∥/ϵ)/ϵ) ,

then B1 ∥F − PKϵ Ftϵ ∥∞ ≤ ϵ

3 .

Proof. By the triangle inequality, 

B1 ∥F − PKϵ Ftϵ ∥∞ ≤ B1 ∥F − Ftϵ ∥∞ + B1 ∥Ftϵ − PKϵ Ftϵ ∥∞ .From Eq. (122) if we select tϵ := ϵ2 

> 72 dG 2B21

B1 ∥F − Ftϵ ∥∞ ≤ B1Gp2dt ϵ ≤ ϵ/6. For the truncation term, we use Equation (123) 

B1 ∥Ftϵ − PKϵ Ftϵ ∥∞ ≤ ∥ F∥B1 Adt−d/4  

> ϵ

e−tϵ (Kϵ )2/2 .46 Thus take 

ζϵ := ϵ

6B1 max {∥ F∥2 , ϵ} , Ad =

s

2d

(d − 1)! · 12 Γ(d/2 ),

Kϵ =

max 

d,

s

d − 12tϵ

,

vuut 2

tϵ

log + Adt−d/4 

> ϵ

ζϵ

! ,and so 

B1 Ftϵ − PKheat  

> ϵ

Ftϵ ∞ ≤ ϵ/6. With the first two conditions (slow spectral expansion and the smoothing operation) of the oversampling method in place, we are now ready to tackle the last one. Next, we present our choice of spherical quadrature along with a sufficient implementation of the quantum spherical harmonic transform, showing that it satisfies the transform condition. An important property enabling the construction of a sufficient quantum spherical harmonic transform is the recursive structure of spherical coordinates. Specifically, 

x = ( cos θj, sin θj ω), ω ∈ Sj−1, 2 ≤ j ≤ d, (148) with zj = cos θj. Let d Sj denote ordinary Riemannian area measure on Sj. It has the recursive decomposition dSj = ( 1 − z2 

> j

)(j−2)/2 dzj dSj−1, dS1 = dφ, (149) Thus the recursive structure plus coordinate change transforms ordinary spherical area into the product measure dSd = dφ

> d

# ∏

> j=2

(1 − z2 

> j

)(j−2)/2 dzj.This coordinate transform is exactly the p = 2 Duffy transform mentioned earlier. The recursive coordinate map accepts every independently chosen tuple 

(zd, . . . , z2, φ) ∈ (−1, 1 )d−1 × [0, 2 π) (150) and produces a point of Sd. This follows from induction on 

(zj, ω) 7 −→ (zj,

q

1 − z2 

> j

ω), ω ∈ Sj−1.Use the following explicit chain of harmonic labels: 

ℓd ≥ ℓd−1 ≥ · · · ≥ ℓ2 ≥ | m|, ℓ1 := |m|, ℓd ≤ N. (151) Define the increment labels 

nj = ℓj − ℓj−1 ≥ 0, ℓj = |m| +

> j

# ∑

> k=2

nk, |m| +

> d

# ∑

> k=2

nk ≤ N. (152) 47 In these labels, a normalized harmonic factors as 

Yn,m(zd, . . . , z2, φ) = eim φ

√2π

> d

# ∏

> j=2

ϕ(j) 

> nj,ℓj−1

(zj), n = ( n2, . . . , nd), (153) where eim φ/√2π has unit norm in L2([ 0, 2 π), d φ). Note that the factor at level j is controlled only by lower labels (m, n2, . . . , nj−1). At level j, after fixing the child degree h = ℓj−1, the normalized one-variable factor has the form 

ϕ(j)

> n,h

(z) = cn,h,j(1 − z2)h/2 Ch+( j−1)/2  

> n

(z), n = ℓj − h, (154) where Cλ 

> n

is a Gegenbauer polynomial. Fix a required quadrature exactness degree Q. Thus the rule must reproduce inner products on VQ, equivalently scalar quadrature for spherical harmonics through degree 2 Q. Set 

R := Q + 1, Mφ := 2Q + 1. (155) To utilize Corollary 3.6 and remove the aliasing error, we require Q ≥ N + K. For each 2 ≤ j ≤ d,choose the R-point Gauss–Jacobi rule 

{(zj,r, wj,r ) : 0 ≤ r < R}. (156) These nodes depend on j and R, but not on a harmonic label ℓ. The Gauss-Jacobi rule applies to the usual Jacob weight function: 

Z 1

> −1

(1 − z2)(j−2)/2 p(z) dz =

> R−1

# ∑

> r=0

wj,r p(zj,r ), deg p ≤ 2R − 1. For the final angular variable, use the centered labels s ∈ {− Q, . . . , Q} and uniform nodes 

φs := 2πsMφ

(mod 2 π), φs ∈ [0, 2 π).They satisfy 1

Mφ

> Q

# ∑

> s=−Q

eim φs =

(

1, m ≡ 0 (mod Mφ),0, m̸ ≡ 0 (mod Mφ). (157) Thus this discrete average equals (2π)−1 R 2π 

> 0

eim φ dφ for every Fourier mode with |m| ≤ 2Q.For every h ∈ { 0, . . . , N}, define the isometry 

Aj,h(r, n) = pwj,r ϕ(j)

> n,h

(zj,r ), 0 ≤ n ≤ N − h. (158) The matrix has R rows and N − h + 1 active columns. Classically pad it to an R × R unitary eAj,h

by choosing any orthonormal completion. The entries of Aj,h are computed as follows. Set 

λ = h + j − 12 . (159) 48 Starting from Cλ 

> 0

(z) = 1 and Cλ 

> 1

(z) = 2λz, apply the recurrence 

(n + 1)Cλ

> n+1

(z) = 2(n + λ)zC λ 

> n

(z) − (n + 2λ − 1)Cλ

> n−1

(z). (160) The normalization formula is 

Z 1

> −1

(1 − z2)λ−1/2 [Cλ 

> n

(z)] 2 dz = π21−2λΓ(n + 2λ)

n!(n + λ)Γ(λ)2 . (161) Because (j − 2)/2 + h = λ − 1/2, insert (161) into the area measure (149). This gives 

cn,h,j =

 π21−2λΓ(n + 2λ)

n!(n + λ)Γ(λ)2

−1/2 

. (162) The aforementioned isometry therefore acts on a basis state as 

|nd, . . . , n2, m⟩ 7 −→ ∑

> rd,..., r2,s

1

pMφ

eim φs

! d

# ∏

> j=2

Aj,ℓj−1 (rj, nj)

× | rd, . . . , r2, s⟩ . (163) By (153), the amplitude in (163) is exactly 

vuut 2π

Mφ

> d

# ∏

> j=2

wj,rj Yn,m(zd,rd , . . . , z2, r2 , φs). (164) For fixed j and h, the product ϕ(j)

> n,h

ϕ(j) 

> n′,h

is a polynomial of degree at most 2 h + n + n′ ≤ 2N ≤ 2Q ≤

2R − 1. Hence the active columns of every Aj,h are orthonormal under the R-point rule, and the resulting weighted evaluation map is an isometry on VN .The sequential composition of the controlled maps 

bAj,h : |h⟩ | n⟩ 7 → | h⟩

> R−1

# ∑

> r=0

Aj,h(r, n) |r⟩ , (165) together with the Mφ-point QFT on the azimuthal register, realizes the desired isometry ((163) extended by linearity) on the fixed product grid 

GSd 

> R,Mφ

=

> d

# ∏

> j=2

{zj,r }r∈[0, R)

!

× { φs}s∈[−Q,Q]. (166) The grid has JQ = Rd−1 Mφ nodes with product weights 

ωr,s := 2π

Mφ

> d

# ∏

> j=2

wj,rj . (167) We use the notation WS,N,Q to denote the desired isometry. Specifically for a general input 

Ψspec = ∑

> n,m

cn,m |nd, . . . , n2, m⟩ , (168) 49 WS,N,Q Ψspec = ∑

> rd,..., r2,s

vuut 1

Mφ

> d

# ∏

> j=2

wj,rj Ψ(zd,rd , . . . , z2, r2 , φs) |rd, . . . , r2, s⟩ , (169) where Ψ = ∑ cn,mYn,m. This maps basis states to spherical harmonics and hence the inverse com-putes the spherical harmonic transform. For the transform-complexity statements below, the quadrature nodes, weights, normalized polynomial values, and orthogonal completions are supplied by exact-real classical preprocess-ing. The stated transform error therefore refers to quantum circuit synthesis. We also require the following classical preprocessing to construct the bAj,h maps. For each pair (j, h) with 2 ≤ j ≤ d

and 0 ≤ h ≤ N, perform the following one-time classical preprocessing for the declared values of 

(d, N, Q, ϵtr ).1. Form the R × R tridiagonal Jacobi matrix for the fixed base weight (1 − z2)(j−2)/2 . Diagonal-ize it to obtain the common nodes zj,r and positive weights wj,r.2. Evaluate the normalized factors ϕ(j)

> n,h

(zj,r ) for 0 ≤ n ≤ N − h. Stable three-term evaluation uses (160); normalization uses (162). Assemble the active matrix Wj,h in (158). 3. Verify, to the working classical precision, that A† 

> j,h

Aj,h = I. Complete its columns determin-istically to an R × R orthogonal matrix eAj,h, for example by a QR completion seeded by the unused computational basis vectors. 4. Apply QR elimination to eAj,h and record at most R(R − 1)/2 Givens rotations, each specified by two row indices and one angle, together with the residual diagonal signs. Round every angle to O(log (d(N + 1)R2/ϵtr )) bits. 5. Store the node and weight tables for each j, and store or provide a uniform classical circuit that emits the Givens list controlled on (j, h). The latter is required for a uniform quantum circuit family. Tridiagonal eigensolution costs O(R2) per level, factor evaluation costs O(NR ) per controlled block, and dense completion plus Givens elimination costs O(R3) per controlled block. Hence the conservative total is O(d(N + 1)R3) arithmetic operations and O(d(N + 1)R2) stored rotation data. The centered azimuthal transform is the QFT over ZMφ under signed labels. Since Mφ =

2Q + 1 need not be a power of two, its logical register is embedded in ⌈log 2 Mφ⌉ qubits and the transform is extended unitarily on unused basis states. An arbitrary-modulus QFT compiled to error ϵtr /2 uses poly (log Mφ, log (1/ ϵtr )) elementary gates, which is included in the transform-error budget below. To evaluate a function on Sd in rectangular coordinates, we can use the following mapping (Duffy map) from the rectangular grid to spherical grid: reversibly evaluate the associated node coordinates and product weight when a Cartesian point oracle or a potential-value oracle requires them. Starting with p = 1, set recursively 

x1 = zd,rd ,

x2 =

q

1 − z2 

> d,rd

zd−1, rd−1 ,50 Algorithm 1 Inverse Quantum Spherical Harmonic Transform 

Input: A state in the chain-label basis |nd, . . . , n2, m⟩ satisfying (152), the fixed quadrature data (156), and target transform error ϵtr .1. Reversibly compute the initial lower degree 

H = ℓd−1 = |m| +

> d−1

# ∑

> k=2

nk

into a work register. For j = d, d − 1, . . . , 2, the invariant at the start of iteration j is H = ℓj−1.Controlled on H, apply eAj,H to overwrite nj by the fixed node index rj. If j > 2, update H

reversibly to H − nj−1 = ℓj−2 before nj−1 is transformed. After level 2, subtract |m| to clear 

H. Thus each lower label is used while it is still spectral and no degree garbage remains. 2. After level 2, only the azimuthal spectral label m remains. Apply a centered inverse Mφ-point QFT synthesized to operator-norm error at most ϵtr /2, 

|m⟩ 7 −→ 1

pMφ

> Q

# ∑

> s=−Q

eim φs |s⟩ .With an ideal QFT the state is exactly (163); the synthesized circuit is within the allocated error. Every spectral register has been overwritten by a node register and no label garbage remains. 

Output: The weighted sample state whose amplitudes are the spherical harmonic expansion eval-uated on (166). 51 and continue through the polar coordinates, ending with the two azimuthal components contain-ing cos φs and sin φs. Multiply the stored one-dimensional weights to obtain (2π/Mφ) ∏j wj,rj .Query the potential and uncompute all coordinate arithmetic afterward. One important qualification is that Algorithm 1 is not quantumly efficient in the usual sense. Specifically, the dependence on the number of grid points in a single radial coordinate R is not logarithmic. However, the discretization theorem keeps R polynomial in the stated problem pa-rameters and inverse accuracy; in particular, R = poly (d, 1/ ϵ) when the remaining parameters are held fixed. 

Theorem 3.17 (Quantum spherical transform) . Let d ≥ 2 and let N , Q ∈ N satisfy Q ≥ N. Set R = Q + 1 and M φ = 2Q + 1. Choose 0 < ϵtr < 1. Let W S,N,Q be the isometry defined in (169) . Then there is a procedure, using classical O (d(N + 1)R3) arithmetic operations and O (d(N + 1)R2) classical memory, to construct unitary quantum circuit eUS 

> W

satisfying 

eUS 

> W

− US 

> W

≤ ϵtr , (170) 

where US

> W

 |0⟩R |ψ⟩C

 =  WS,N,Q |ψ⟩ 

> R

|0⟩C . (171) 

The unitary eUS 

> W

uses at most O



d(N + 1)R2 polylog d(N + 1)R

ϵtr 

+ polylog Mφ

ϵtr 



one- and two-qubit gates and O(d log R + log Mφ + polylog (d(N + 1)R/ϵtr )) (172) 

qubits. Proof. The case Q = 0 is trivial, so henceforth assume it is positive. For row indices p < q, consider the Givens rotation Gpq (θ) which acts as the rotation 

Gpq (θ) = 

cos θ − sin θ

sin θ cos θ



= Ry(2θ), (173) in the (|p⟩ , |q⟩) basis, and fixes other basis vectors. We first describe how this abstract two-level operation is synthesized on qubits. Put 

nR = ⌈log 2 R⌉ (174) and embed the R-dimensional matrix as 

bWj,h = eWj,h ⊕ I2nR −R (175) on an nR-qubit binary index register. Write p and q as binary strings, set a = p xor q, and choose a bit k for which ak = 1. Let Ppq be the reversible affine permutation obtained by first applying X

52 on every bit where p is one and then, for every i̸ = k with ai = 1, applying a CNOT from bit k to bit i. It obeys 

Ppq |p⟩ = |0nR ⟩ , Ppq |q⟩ = |ek⟩ , (176) where ek is the string whose only nonzero bit is k. Therefore 

Gpq (θ) = P†

> pq

 Λri =0, i̸ =k Ry,k(2θ) Ppq . (177) where Ry, k is Ry on qubit k. The middle gate rotates qubit k only when all other index bits are zero. The permutation is bijective, so every other binary address, including every padded address at least R, is fixed after the conjugation. To apply this rotation only in the block indexed by h0, compute the predicate [h = h0] and add it as a control on the middle multi-controlled rotation in (177). The surrounding permutation need not be controlled by P† 

> pq

Ppq = I. If 

nh = ⌈log 2(N + 1)⌉, (178) the middle rotation has at most nR − 1 + nh controls. Open controls are converted to ordinary controls with X gates. With O(nR + nh) clean work qubits, their conjunction can be computed and uncomputed using O(nR + nh) Toffoli gates, between which one applies a singly controlled 

Ry(2θ). The latter has a constant-size decomposition into CNOTs and single-qubit rotations. Con-sequently, one h-controlled two-level rotation costs 

O



log R + log (N + 1) + log 1

δ



(179) Clifford, Toffoli, and synthesized single-qubit gates at operator error δ. Standard ancilla-free de-compositions give a quadratic polylogarithmic overhead instead and do not change the stated asymptotic bound. QR elimination reduces one R × R orthogonal matrix using at most R(R − 1)/2 such rotations and leaves a diagonal matrix D = diag (±1). Reconstructing the matrix uses the inverse rotations in reverse elimination order, followed by the recorded sign correction. Each negative entry of 

D is an addressed phase flip and has the same polylogarithmic binary-address cost; all O(R)

possible sign corrections are lower order than the O(R2) rotations. This also covers an orthogonal completion of determinant −1, which cannot be represented by determinant-one Givens rotations alone. There are d − 1 angular levels and at most N + 1 control values h per level. Each padded 

R-dimensional unitary uses O(R2) Givens rotations. Multiplying the three counts gives 

Lrot ≤ (d − 1)( N + 1)R(R − 1)/2 = O(d(N + 1)R2). (180) For exact factors Uk and synthesized factors eUk, quote the telescoping product inequality 

UL · · · U1 − eUL · · · eU1 ≤

> L

# ∑

> k=1

Uk − eUk . (181) Use it by setting each local error to δ = ϵtr /(2Lrot ). The total error from the controlled radial blocks is then at most ϵtr /2. Computing the initial degree accumulator and updating it once per level costs O(d log (N + 1)) reversible arithmetic gates. Synthesize the centered QFT to error at most 53 ϵtr /2 using polylog (Mφ/ϵtr ) gates. The triangle inequality gives total transform error at most ϵtr .Substituting the value of δ into (179) gives the displayed gate bound. Binary node registers, the degree accumulator, the control-conjunction workspace, and reversible arithmetic give the qubit bound. Dense orthogonal completion and decomposition cost at most O(R3) per controlled block classically. It remains to relate the in-place transform to the dilation convention in (24). Pad each coefficient-label register to the corresponding node-register width. A reversible label transfer US 

> tr

maps 

|0⟩R |n, m⟩C 7 −→ | n, m⟩R |0⟩C

on the valid label subspace and is extended arbitrarily to a permutation of all padded basis states. Applying the ideal in-place spherical transform on R after this transfer gives US 

> W

in (171). Replac-ing the ideal transform by the synthesized circuit gives eUS 

> W

; unitary invariance of the operator norm and the transform estimate already proved imply (170). The transfer consists only of re-versible relabelling and swaps on O(d log R + log Mφ) qubits, so it is lower order than the stated gate bound. 

Theorem 3.18 (Sphere Global Spectral Method Discretization) . Let d ≥ 2, L 0 ∈ N, T > 0, and 

ϵ ∈ (0, 1 ). Let a , b ∈ L1(0, T; R), put B 1 := R T 

> 0

|b(t)| dt, and consider i∂tΦ(t) = [ −a(t)∆Sd + b(t) f ]Φ(t), Φ(0) ∈ V L0 , ∥Φ(0)∥ = 1. 

Suppose f : Sd → R is bounded and geodesically G-Lipschitz. Fix a bounded, nonzero, geodesically Gh-Lipschitz observable h : Sd → R.Then there exist spectral and quadrature exactness degrees N , Q ∈ Z≥0, each bounded by 

poly (d, L0, B1, G, Gh, ∥ f ∥∞ , ∥h∥∞ , 1/ ϵ, 1/ ∥h∥∞),

with Q ≥ N. Set R := Q + 1 and M φ := 2Q + 1, let W S,N,Q be the weighted evaluation isometry on 

GSd 

> R,Mφ

, and put 

bfQ := ∑

> r,s

f (xr,s) |r, s⟩⟨ r, s| .

Let the exact finite-dimensional coefficient state solve i∂t|cN,Q(t)⟩ =

h

a(t)DN + b(t)W† 

> S,N,Q

bfQWS,N,Q

i

|cN,Q(t)⟩, |cN,Q(0)⟩ = S† 

> N

Φ(0), (182) 

and set 

|ΨQ(t)⟩ := WS,N,Q|cN,Q(t)⟩, bhQ := ∑

> r,s

h(xr,s) |r, s⟩⟨ r, s| .

Then 

sup 

> 0≤t≤T

∥SN |cN,Q(t)⟩ − Φ(t)∥ = O(ϵ), (183) 

⟨ΨQ(T)|bhQ|ΨQ(T)⟩ − ⟨ Φ(T), hΦ(T)⟩ = O(∥h∥∞ ϵ). (184) 

The coefficient and quadrature representations require O(d log (Q + 1)) data qubits. 

54 Proof. Suppose first that B1 > 0. The Fischer decomposition gives slow spectral growth. Apply the heat-kernel smoothing construction to f and h and choose a common K such that real functions 

fK, hK ∈ V K satisfy 

B1 ∥ f − fK ∥∞ = O(ϵ), ∥h − hK ∥∞ = O(∥h∥∞ ϵ).Choose 

q := ⌈max {2eB 1 ∥ fK ∥∞ , 3 + log 2(1/ ϵ)}⌉ , N := L0 + ( q − 1)K, Q := N + K.The heat-kernel estimates above give the asserted polynomial bounds on N and Q. The quadra-ture (166) R = Q + 1 and Mφ = 2Q + 1 is Q-exact, so Corollary 3.6 gives both (183) and (184). Proposition 3.2 identifies its quadrature evolution with (182). If B1 = 0, the kinetic evolution remains in VL0 . Smooth only h, obtaining hK ∈ V K with 

∥h − hK ∥∞ = O(∥h∥∞ ϵ), and take N = L0 and Q = N + K. The state error is zero. If v =

SN cN,Q(t), slow spectral growth gives hK v ∈ V N+K = VQ, while v ∈ V N ⊆ V Q. Thus Q-exactness of the discrete inner product makes the discrete and continuous hK expectations identical. Insert-ing hK on both sides proves (184). The chain-label and product-grid registers use O(d log (Q + 1)) 

qubits. 

Theorem 3.19 (Digital interaction-picture simulation on the sphere) . Assume the hypotheses of Theo-rem 3.18 with target accuracy 0 < ϵ < 1, and let N , Q, |cN,Q(t)⟩, |ΨQ(t)⟩, and bhQ be the objects furnished there. Assume additionally that a and b are piecewise C 1 and that b has finitely many sign intervals. Put B1 := R T 

> 0

|b(t)| dt, and let Λ f ≥ max {1, ∥ f ∥∞}.Assume the following coherent access for a sufficiently small universal constant c 0 > 0. An initial-state circuit using Cprep gates and Qprep work qubits prepares a normalized state |ec0⟩ satisfying 

∥| ec0⟩ − | cN,Q(0)⟩∥ ≤ ϵprep ≤ c0ϵ.

The quadrature data and compiled spherical transforms of Theorem 3.17 are available. At any spherical quadrature node x r,s, a binary oracle O f and its inverse evaluate a number ef (xr,s) satisfying 

| ef (xr,s) − f (xr,s)| ≤ ϵ f , 0 < ϵ f ≤ Λ f , B1ϵ f ≤ c0ϵ,

at a cost of C f gates per call, including reversible evaluation and uncomputation of the spherical node coordinates. Finally, for every requested 0 < δ < 1, controlled access to the schedules, their required integrals and inverse time reparameterization, and the spherical kinetic phases is available to operator error 

δ at a cost polylog (d, N, 1/ δ) gates per use. Then there is a quantum circuit producing a normalized coefficient state |ecN,Q(T)⟩, with success prob-ability at least 1 − O (ϵ), such that 

∥SN |ecN,Q(T)⟩ − Φ(T)∥ = O(ϵ). (185) 

Let R and C denote the quadrature and coefficient registers. After the simulation, append |0⟩R and define the actual readout output by 

| eΨQ(T)⟩RC := eUS

> W

 |0⟩R|ecN,Q(T)⟩C

,55 where eUS 

> W

is the implemented spherical-transform dilation from Theorem 3.17. Define 

bhQ := ∑

> r,s

h(xr,s) |r, s⟩⟨ r, s|R

!

⊗ IC,

with the quadrature-register operator set to zero on unused padded node addresses. Then 

⟨ eΨQ(T)|bhQ| eΨQ(T)⟩ − ⟨ Φ(T), hΦ(T)⟩ = O(∥h∥∞ ϵ). (186) 

Let τf := Λ f B1. The circuit makes Nf = O



(1 + τf ) log (ee(1 + τf )/ϵ)

log log (ee(1 + τf )/ϵ)



= eO(1 + τf ) (187) 

calls to O f or O † 

> f

and uses 

Cgates = Cprep + eO



(1 + τf )



d(N + 1)( Q + 1)2 + C f + log 2

 2Λ f

ϵ f

 

(188) 

elementary gates. Here eO suppresses logarithmic factors in d , N, Q, (1 + τf )/ϵ and in the schedule arith-metic. The total qubit count is 

Qprep + O



d log (Q + 1) + log 2Λ f

ϵ f

+ polylog d(N + 1)( Q + 1)( 1 + τf )

ϵ



. (189) 

Proof. By Theorem 3.18, the target exact coefficient evolution is (182). Choose all spherical-transform, kinetic-phase, and schedule subroutines to operator error at most 

δ = Θ

 ϵ log log (ee(1 + τf )/ϵ)(1 + τf ) log (ee(1 + τf )/ϵ)



,with a sufficiently small implied constant. Theorem 3.17 then supplies a synthesized dilation 

eUS 

> W

satisfying eUS 

> W

− US 

> W

≤ δ. To encode the sampled potential, query O f , reversibly clamp the returned value to [−Λ f , Λ f ], compute a single-qubit rotation whose clean amplitude is ef (xr,s)/Λ f ,and uncompute the value register. This uses two calls to Of or O† 

> f

and O(log 2(2Λ f /ϵ f ) + log 2(1/ δ)) 

gates, apart from the oracle cost. Conjugating this sampled-value block by the implemented for-ward and inverse spherical transforms block encodes the compressed potential W† 

> S,N,Q

bfQWS,N,Q

with unnormalized operator error at most ϵ f + O(Λ f δ).Move to the kinetic frame generated by a(t)DN and rescale time using d σ = Λ f |b(t)| dt. The rescaled evolution lasts for τf = Λ f B1 and has a norm-one interaction Hamiltonian. On each sign interval of b, a time-controlled interaction-picture query consists of the compressed-potential block surrounded by the controlled kinetic phases; intervals on which b = 0 are omitted. The access assumptions supply the sign of b, the inverse time conversion, and the controlled phases. The rescaled truncated-Dyson interaction-picture algorithm [LW18; Ber+20] simulates this evo-lution to operator error O(ϵ), with failure probability O(ϵ), using the number of time-controlled queries in (187). Returning to the Schr ¨ odinger picture requires one final kinetic phase. Each 56 interaction-picture query contains one sampled-potential block and hence two binary-oracle calls, one forward spherical transform, one inverse spherical transform, and two controlled kinetic phases. This proves (187). Regard the synthesized transform sandwich as an exact block encoding of a nearby com-pressed Hamiltonian. Duhamel’s formula contributes B1ϵ f + O(τf δ) from this Hamiltonian per-turbation, while the hybrid argument over the time-controlled queries contributes another O(ϵ)

from kinetic-phase and schedule synthesis. By the choice of δ, the truncated-Dyson, oracle, trans-form, kinetic, and schedule errors therefore sum to O(ϵ). Initial-state preparation adds at most 

ϵprep by unitarity, so 

∥| ecN,Q(T)⟩ − | cN,Q(T)⟩∥ = O(ϵ).Combining this estimate with (183) proves (185). At readout, applying eUS 

> W

instead of US 

> W

adds at most δ in state norm. The ideal joint readout state is 

|ΨQ(T)⟩RC :=  WS,N,Q|cN,Q(T)⟩

> R

|0⟩C.Together with the coefficient estimate above, this gives 

| eΨQ(T)⟩RC − | ΨQ(T)⟩RC = O(ϵ).Then 

|⟨ v|bhQ|v⟩ − ⟨ w|bhQ|w⟩| ≤ 2 ∥h∥∞ ∥| v⟩ − | w⟩∥ .Combining this inequality with (184) proves (186). Finally, Theorem 3.17 gives the per-transform cost eO(d(N + 1)( Q + 1)2) at the chosen value of 

δ. The assumed schedule and kinetic-phase cost is polylogarithmic at the same tolerance. Multi-plying the per-query cost by the query bound (187), and adding state preparation and final read-out, gives (188). The transform registers, binary value register, truncated-Dyson time and order registers, and reusable schedule and kinetic workspace give (189). 

3.6 Simplex with Wright–Fisher metric 

Let 

Sd =

(

x ∈ Rd 

> ≥0

:

> d

# ∑

> i=1

xi ≤ 1

)

, xd+1 = 1 −

> d

# ∑

> i=1

xi, (190) be the d-dimensional simplex. Equip Sd with the Wright–Fisher metric, whose inverse metric coordinates (x1, . . . , xd) is 

gij (x) = xi(δij − xj). (191) The corresponding Laplace–Beltrami operator is 

∆Sd =

> d

# ∑

> i,j=1

xi(δij − xj)∂i∂j + 12

> d

# ∑

> i=1

(1 − (d + 1)xi) ∂i. (192) 57 The eigenfunctions of ∆Sd are the multidimensional Jacobi polynomials: 

Pn(x) = 

> d

# ∏

> i=1



sni 

> i

P(−1/2, Ai+1+2Ni+1−1)

> ni



1 − 2xi

si

 

, si :=

> d+1

# ∑

> r=i

xr (193) 

− ∆gPn = |n|



|n| + d − 12



Pn (194) where 

Ai :=

> d+1

# ∑

> r=i

12 = d + 2 − i

2 , Ni :=

> d

# ∑

> r=i

nr, Nd+1 := 0, (195) and P(α,β) 

> n

is the n-th Jacobi polynomial with parameters α and β. For the simplex case, the labeling of the eigenfunctions is, like the sphere case, done according to the total degree L(Pn) = ∥n∥1.Hence Hℓ refers to space of Pn satisfying ∥n∥1 = ℓ.

Lemma 3.20. Let Poly ≤K (Sd) be the space of polynomials on the simplex of degree at most K. Then for all K, 

VK = Poly ≤K (Sd).

Proof. Consider the multivariable Jacobi polynomial in barycentric coordinates (193). A single one-variable Jacobi polynomial factor is a polynomial of degree ni in xi/si. Consequently, each bracket in (193) is a sum of terms 

xqi sni −qi , 0 ≤ q ≤ ni, (196) and is a barycentric polynomial of degree ni. Their product has total degree at most |n|. In partic-ular, 

∥n∥1 ≤ K =⇒ Pn ∈ Poly ≤K (Sd).Taking spans gives the first, nontrivial inclusion Jac ≤K (Sd) ⊆ Poly ≤K (Sd).Conversely, the nonzero polynomials {P n : ∥n∥ ≤ K} are mutually orthogonal in L2(Sd, dvol g)

and hence linearly independent. Note that #{n ∈ Nd : ∥n∥1 ≤ K} =

K + dd



= dim Poly ≤K (Sd).Hence Poly ≤K (Sd) = Jac ≤K (Sd).The above makes it apparent that the Jacobi polynomials satisfy the slow expansion property. For the simplex Laplace–Beltrami operator in the Wright–Fisher metric, the appropriate smooth-ing operation is averaging the function over the multinomial distribution, also called Bernstein smoothing. 58 Lemma 3.21 (Bernstein smoothing on the simplex) . Let F : ∆d → R be bounded and G-Lipschitz in the Euclidean distance on barycentric vectors. For an integer K ≥ 1, let Y ∼ Multinomial (K; x1, . . . , xd+1)

and define 

(BK F)( x) = E [F(Y/K)] , x ∈ ∆d (197) 

Then the smoothed function satisfies BK F ∈ V K, ∥B K F∥∞ ≤ ∥ F∥∞, and 

∥F − B K F∥∞ ≤ G

√K . (198) 

Proof. For a multi-index ν = ( ν1, . . . , νd+1) ∈ Nd+1 with |ν| = K, the multinomial mass function is 

pK,ν(x) := Pr (Y = ν) = K!

ν1! · · · νd+1!

> d+1

# ∏

> i=1

xνi 

> i

. (199) Therefore the expectation in (197) is 

(BK F)( x) = ∑

> |ν|=K

F(ν/K)pK,ν(x). (200) Taking absolute values in (200) gives 

|B K F(x)| ≤ ∑

> |ν|=K

pK,ν(x)|F(ν/K)| ≤ ∥ F∥∞ . (201) Taking the supremum over x proves the desired infinity norm bound. We next prove the approximation estimate. Consider x ∈ ∆d. Let {Z(j)}Kj=1 be independent and identically distributed as Pr (Z(j) = ei) = xi.Then define 

Y = Z(1) + · · · + Z(K),Also, 

EZ(r) 

> i

= xi =⇒ EYi = Kx i

In particular, Y/K − x has mean zero and a sum of independent random variables, so 

E ∥Y/K − x∥22 = 1

K2

> d+1

# ∑

> i=1

Var (Yi)= 1

K

> d+1

# ∑

> i=1

(xi − x2 

> i

)= 1 − ∑d+1 

> i=1

x2

> i

K . (202) Cauchy–Schwarz applied to ∑i xi = 1 gives 1 ≤ (d + 1)

> d+1

# ∑

> i=1

x2 

> i

=⇒ 1 −

> d+1

# ∑

> i=1

x2 

> i

≤ dd + 1 < 1, 59 so 

E ∥Y/K − x∥22 ≤ 1

K .Finally, Lipschitzness in Euclidean norm and the above give 

|F(x) − B K F(x)| ≤ E|F(x) − F(Y/K)|≤ GE ∥Y/K − x∥2

≤ G



E ∥Y/K − x∥22

1/2 

≤ G

√K .Taking supremum leads to desired error bound. It remains to verify BK F ∈ V K. Every pK,ν in (200) is a homogeneous barycentric monomial of degree K. On the simplex, substitute xd+1 = 1 − ∑di=1 xi. Expanding the final factor gives 

xν1 

> 1

· · · xνd 

> d

1 −

> d

# ∑

> i=1

xi

!νd+1

.Every term in this expansion has total degree between ∑di=1 νi and 

> d

# ∑

> i=1

νi + νd+1 = K.From the above calculation, we already know 

pK,ν ∈ Poly ≤K (∆d) = ⇒ B K F(x) ∈ Poly ≤K (∆d).Thus with Lemma 3.20 BK F ∈ V K.Recall the Simplex Duffy map DSd (97), which takes y ∈ [0, 1 )d to x = DSd (y) ∈ S d. The Jacobi polynomial transform as follows: 

bPn(y) := Pn ◦ D Sd (y) = 

> d

# ∏

> i=1

(1 − yi)Ni+1 P(−1/2, Ai+1+2Ni+1−1) 

> ni

(1 − 2yi).Similar to the case of the sphere in the previous section, the above provides a recursive factor-ization of the multi-dimensional eignefunctions. For each 1 ≤ j ≤ d, choose the same R-point Gauss–Jacobi rule 

{(yj,r, wj,r ) : 0 ≤ r < R}. (203) Fix a Q-exact quadrature (3.1) set 

R := Q + 1, 2R − 1 ≥ 2Q, (204) with Q ≥ N.60 Again following what was done in Section 3.5 but with the Jacobi labels replacing the spherical harmonic labels. For h = Ni+1, define 

ψ(i)

> n,h

(y) = cn,h,i(1 − y)h P(−1/2, Ai+1+2h−1) 

> n

(1 − 2y), (205) and 

A∆

> i,h

(r, n) = √wi,r ψ(i)

> n,h

(yi,r ), 0 ≤ n ≤ N − h. (206) This matrix has R rows and N − h + 1 active columns. Since R ≥ N + 1, we complete the isometry to form a real R × R orthogonal matrix eA∆

> i,h

. The entries of A∆ 

> i,h

are computed by via the Jacobi recurrence relation. The cubature has Rd nodes and after applying the Duffy map to go back to the simplex: 

X ∆ 

> R

:= {xr : 0 ≤ ri < R} ⊂ S d (207) and product weights 

wr =

> d

# ∏

> i=1

wi,ri . (208) In Duffy coordinates the grid is 

G∆ 

> R

=

> d

# ∏

> i=1

{yi,r : 0 ≤ r < R}, (209) The transform has same preprocessing step as quantum spherical harmonic transform, i.e. compute the A∆ 

> i,h

and embed them in unitaries. For a general input 

|Ψ∆⟩ = ∑

> |n|≤ N

cn |n1, . . . , nd⟩ , (210) the composition of the above operations performs the inverse Jacobi transform WSd,N,Q:

WSd,N,Q|Ψ∆⟩ = ∑

> r1,..., rd

vuut d

# ∏

> i=1

wi,ri

"

# ∑

> |n|≤ N

cn

> d

# ∏

> i=1

ψ(i)  

> ni,Ni+1

(yi)

#

|r1, . . . , rd⟩ . (211) 

Theorem 3.22 (Quantum simplex transform) . Let d ≥ 1 and let N , Q ∈ N satisfy Q ≥ N, and set R = Q + 1. Choose 0 < ϵtr < 1. Let W ∆,N,Q be the isometry defined by (211) . Then there is a procedure using O (d(N + 1)R3) classical arithmetic operations and O (d(N + 1)R2) classical storage that constructs a unitary eU∆ 

> W

satisfying 

eU∆ 

> W

− U∆ 

> W

≤ ϵtr , (212) 

where U∆

> W

 |0⟩R |ψ⟩C

 =  W∆,N,Q |ψ⟩ 

> R

|0⟩C . (213) 

The unitary eU∆ 

> W

uses at most O



d(N + 1)R2 polylog d(N + 1)R

ϵtr 



(214) 61 Algorithm 2 Quantum Jacobi Transform over Simplex 

Input: A total-degree label state |n1, . . . , nd⟩ with ∑i ni ≤ N, embedded in ⌈log 2 R⌉-qubit coordi-nate registers, the fixed quadrature data (203), and target transform error ϵtr .1. Reversibly compute the initial suffix 

H = N2 =

> d

# ∑

> j=2

nj

in a work register. For i = 1, 2, . . . , d, the invariant at the start of iteration i is H = Ni+1.Controlled on H, apply eW∆ 

> i,H

to overwrite ni by the common node index ri. If i < d, replace 

H reversibly by H − ni+1 = Ni+2 before ni+1 is transformed. After iteration d − 1 the accu-mulator is zero, so the final block has h = 0 and no suffix garbage remains. This increasing order is essential because every label subtracted from H is still spectral at the moment it is used. 2. When the potential oracle needs the physical point, initialize a remainder register s = 1 and compute 

xi = s y i,ri , s ← s(1 − yi,ri ), 1 ≤ i ≤ d.At the end set xd+1 = s. If required, multiply the stored one-dimensional weights to obtain 

∏i wi,ri . Query the potential and uncompute the Duffy-coordinate and weight arithmetic afterward. 

Output: The weighted sample state on G∆ 

> R

, equivalently on the physical grid X ∆ 

> R

.62 one- and two-qubit gates and O



d log R + polylog d(N + 1)R

ϵtr 



(215) 

qubits. Proof. The proof is basically the same as Theorem 3.17, except the azimuthal/QFT part is excluded. 

Theorem 3.23 (Simplex Global Spectral Method Discretization) . Let d ≥ 1, L 0 ∈ N, T > 0, and 

0 < ϵ < 1. Let a , b ∈ L1(0, T; R), put B 1 := R T 

> 0

|b(t)| dt, and consider i∂tΦ(t) = [ −a(t)∆g + b(t) f ]Φ(t), Φ(0) ∈ V L0 , ∥Φ(0)∥ = 1. 

Suppose f : ∆d → R is bounded and G-Lipschitz in the Euclidean distance on barycentric vectors. Fix a bounded, nonzero, G h-Lipschitz observable h : ∆d → R in the same metric. Then there exist spectral and quadrature exactness degrees N , Q ∈ N, each bounded by 

poly (d, L0, B1, G, Gh, ∥ f ∥∞ , ∥h∥∞ , 1/ ϵ, 1/ ∥h∥∞),

with Q ≥ N. Set R := Q + 1, let W ∆,N,Q be the weighted evaluation isometry on X ∆ 

> R

, and put 

bfQ := ∑

> r

f (xr) |r⟩⟨ r| .

Let the exact finite-dimensional coefficient state solve i∂t|cN,Q(t)⟩ =

h

a(t)DN + b(t)W† 

> ∆,N,Q

bfQW∆,N,Q

i

|cN,Q(t)⟩, |cN,Q(0)⟩ = S† 

> N

Φ(0), (216) 

and set 

|ΨQ(t)⟩ := W∆,N,Q|cN,Q(t)⟩, bhQ := ∑

> r

h(xr) |r⟩⟨ r| .

Then 

sup 

> 0≤t≤T

∥SN |cN,Q(t)⟩ − Φ(t)∥ = O(ϵ), (217) 

⟨ΨQ(T)|bhQ|ΨQ(T)⟩ − ⟨ Φ(T), hΦ(T)⟩ = O(∥h∥∞ ϵ). (218) 

The coefficient and quadrature representations require O(d log (Q + 1)) data qubits. Proof. As mentioned near the beggining of this section, the multivariate Jacobi eigenfunctions satisfy the slow spectral growth property (27) due to Lemma 3.20. Define 

fK := BK f , hK := BK h.By Lemma 3.21, fK, hK ∈ V K and 

∥ fK ∥∞ ≤ ∥ f ∥∞ , ∥ f − fK ∥∞ ≤ G

√K , ∥h − hK ∥∞ ≤ Gh

√K .63 Since the Bernstein operator is a positive contraction, ∥hK ∥∞ ≤ ∥ h∥∞. Choose an integer K suffi-ciently large that 

B1G

√K = O(ϵ), Gh

√K = O(∥h∥∞ ϵ),and choose the integer 

q := ⌈max {2eB 1 ∥ fK ∥∞ , 3 + log 2(1/ ϵ)}⌉ .Set N = L0 + ( q − 1)K and Q = N + K. As mentioned earlier, the simplex quadrature (209) is Q-exact. Corollary 3.6, applied with fK and hK as above, defines the continuum quadrature evolution 

euN,Q(t) ∈ V N and gives sup 

> 0≤t≤T

∥Φ(t) − euN,Q(t)∥ ≤ 2B1 ∥ f − fK ∥∞ + 22−q

≤ 2B1G

√K + 22−q = O(ϵ).By Proposition 3.2, the coefficient state in the theorem is 

|cN,Q(t)⟩ = S† 

> N

euN,Q(t),and it evolves according to (216). From the same corollary, the observable estimate (47) similarly gives 

⟨ΨQ(T)|bhQ|ΨQ(T)⟩ − ⟨ Φ(T)|h|Φ(T)⟩

≤ 4B1 ∥hK ∥∞ ∥ f − fK ∥∞ + 23−q ∥hK ∥∞ + 2 ∥h − hK ∥∞

≤ 4B1G

√K ∥h∥∞ + 23−q ∥h∥∞ + 2Gh

√K

= O(∥h∥∞ ϵ).The grid and coefficient registers use O(d log (Q + 1)) qubits. 

Theorem 3.24 (Digital interaction-picture simulation on the simplex) . Assume the hypotheses of The-orem 3.23 with target accuracy 0 < ϵ < 1, and let N , Q, |cN,Q(t)⟩, |ΨQ(t)⟩, and bhQ be the objects fur-nished there. Assume additionally that a and b are piecewise C 1 and that b has finitely many sign intervals. Put B 1 := R T 

> 0

|b(t)| dt, and let Λ f ≥ max {1, ∥ f ∥∞}.Assume coherent access as follows, for a sufficiently small universal constant c 0 > 0. An initial-state circuit using Cprep gates and Qprep work qubits prepares a normalized |ec0⟩ with 

∥| ec0⟩ − | cN,Q(0)⟩∥ ≤ ϵprep ≤ c0ϵ.

The quadrature data and compiled Jacobi transforms from Theorem 3.22 are available. At each simplex quadrature node, a binary oracle O f and its inverse evaluate ef (xr) satisfying 

| ef (xr) − f (xr)| ≤ ϵ f , 0 < ϵ f ≤ Λ f , B1ϵ f ≤ c0ϵ,

at a cost of C f gates and Q f work qubits per call, including reversible Duffy coordinate evaluation and uncomputation. For every 0 < δ < 1, controlled schedule access and the Wright–Fisher kinetic phases are available to operator error δ using polylog (d, N, 1/ δ) gates per use. 

64 Then there is a quantum circuit producing a normalized coefficient state |ecN,Q(T)⟩, with success prob-ability at least 1 − O (ϵ), such that 

∥SN |ecN,Q(T)⟩ − Φ(T)∥ = O(ϵ). (219) 

Let R and C denote the quadrature and coefficient registers and define 

| eΨQ(T)⟩RC := eU∆

> W

 |0⟩R|ecN,Q(T)⟩C

,

where eU∆ 

> W

is the implemented Jacobi-transform dilation. Extend the quadrature observable to the joint register by 

bhQ := ∑

> r

h(xr) |r⟩⟨ r|R

!

⊗ IC,

setting it to zero on unused padded node addresses. Then 

⟨ eΨQ(T)|bhQ| eΨQ(T)⟩ − ⟨ Φ(T), hΦ(T)⟩ = O(∥h∥∞ ϵ). (220) 

These guarantees include binary-oracle, interaction-picture, kinetic-phase, and Jacobi-transform synthesis errors. Let τf := Λ f B1. The circuit makes Nf = O



(1 + τf ) log (ee(1 + τf )/ϵ)

log log (ee(1 + τf )/ϵ)



= eO(1 + τf ) (221) 

calls to O f or O † 

> f

and uses 

Cprep + eO



(1 + τf )



d(N + 1)( Q + 1)2 + C f + log 2

 2Λ f

ϵ f

 

(222) 

elementary gates. The total qubit count is 

Qprep + Q f + O



d log (Q + 1) + log 2Λ f

ϵ f

+ polylog d(N + 1)( Q + 1)( 1 + τf )

ϵ



. (223) 

Proof. By Theorem 3.23, the exact target evolution is (216). Choose the Jacobi transforms, kinetic phases, and schedule subroutines to operator error 

δ = Θ

 ϵ log log (ee(1 + τf )/ϵ)(1 + τf ) log (ee(1 + τf )/ϵ)



with a sufficiently small implied constant. Theorem 3.22 supplies eU∆ 

> W

with eU∆ 

> W

− U∆ 

> W

≤ δ.Query Of , reversibly clamp the returned value to [−Λ f , Λ f ], compute a one-qubit ampli-tude ef (xr)/Λ f , and uncompute. This uses two oracle calls and O(log 2(2Λ f /ϵ f ) + log 2(1/ δ)) 

gates, apart from the oracle cost. Conjugating this block by the implemented forward and in-verse Jacobi transforms block encodes W† 

> ∆,N,Q

bfQW∆,N,Q with unnormalized operator error at most 

ϵ f + O(Λ f δ).65 Move to the kinetic frame generated by a(t)DN and rescale time by d σ = Λ f |b(t)| dt. The rescaled interaction evolution has duration τf and norm at most one. Each time-controlled query uses the compressed-potential block surrounded by controlled Wright–Fisher kinetic phases. The rescaled truncated-Dyson algorithm [LW18; Ber+20] achieves operator error and failure probabil-ity O(ϵ) with the query count in (221). Each query contains two binary-oracle calls, one forward Jacobi transform, one inverse Jacobi transform, and two controlled kinetic phases. Duhamel’s formula contributes B1ϵ f + O(τf δ) from the nearby compressed Hamiltonian, and the hybrid argument over the time-controlled queries contributes O(ϵ) from schedule and kinetic synthesis. Together with truncated-Dyson and initial-state errors, this gives 

∥| ecN,Q(T)⟩ − | cN,Q(T)⟩∥ = O(ϵ).Equation (217) proves (219). At readout, the implemented Jacobi dilation adds at most δ in state norm. Combining the resulting joint-state estimate with 

|⟨ v|bhQ|v⟩ − ⟨ w|bhQ|w⟩| ≤ 2 ∥h∥∞ ∥| v⟩ − | w⟩∥ 

and (218) proves (220). Finally, Theorem 3.22 gives per-transform cost eO(d(N + 1)( Q + 1)2) at tolerance δ. Multiply-ing by (221) and adding preparation, readout, oracle arithmetic, and reusable Dyson/schedule workspace proves the gate and qubit bounds. 

# 4 Simulation on General Riemannian Manifolds – Coherent Chart Spec-tral Methods 

This section develops a more generic simulation algorithm for Reimannian Schr ¨ odinger equations by applying local Euclidean spectral methods in a finite atlas and coherently recombining the local solutions. These models require an extended access model that provides more information than what was required by the global spectral methods. This so we can properly localize the global wavefunction on each coordinate chart and apply the local spectral method. Critical to this is the notion of subordinate partition of unity. The collection of smooth, compactly supported, real-valued functions on some open set U ⊆

M is denoted C∞ 

> c

(U).

Definition 4.1 (Partitions of Unity) . We say a collection {χα ∈ C∞ 

> c

(M)}α∈I is a partition of unity if 

# ∑

> α∈I

χ2

> α

(x) = 1, ∀x ∈ M . (224) Taking the square in Eq. (224) is nonstandard, but is convenient for L2 spaces. A partition of unity 

{χα}, is subordinate to an atlas A = {(Uℓ, κℓ)}ℓ∈[nch ] if the support of each partition χα is contained in some Uℓ. For a PoU subordinate to a finite atlas, one can always define a new finite PoU {χℓ}

indexed with the chart. When we speak of subordinate PoUs we will always assume this finitely-indexed version. For a function ψ ∈ L2(M), the L2 norm can be expressed in terms of the subordinate partition of unity as 

∥ψ∥2 =

> [nch ]

# ∑

> ℓ=1
> Z
> Ωℓ

|χℓ(κ−1 

> ℓ

(y)) ψ[ℓ](y)|2ρ[ℓ](y)dy .66 The method requires access to a particular kind of atlas, which always exists for compact man-ifolds. Let S = [ −1/2, 1/2 ]d. A finite atlas A = {(Uℓ, κℓ)}ℓ∈I is box-adapted if S ⊂ Ωℓ := κℓ(Uℓ)

for every ℓ and the smaller coordinate neighborhoods {κ−1 

> ℓ

(int S)}ℓ∈I cover M. Such a finite re-finement exists on a compact manifold: first choose relatively compact coordinate neighborhoods that cover M, and then restrict and affinely rescale their coordinate maps. 

Definition 4.2 (Box-subordinate PoU) . Let A be a box-adapted atlas. A real quadratic PoU {χℓ}ℓ∈I is 

box-subordinate to A if 

# ∑

> ℓ∈I

χ2 

> ℓ

= 1, κℓ(supp χℓ) ⊆ int S for every ℓ ∈ I .

Equivalently, the support in each chart lies a positive distance from ∂S. Such a PoU is obtained from smooth bump functions subordinate to the cover {κ−1 

> ℓ

(int S)}ℓ by normalizing their pointwise Euclidean square sum. 

The support of each bump function being a positive distance from the bound of S ensure a chart-dependent collar of ∂S on which every localized representative (χℓψ) ◦ κ−1 

> ℓ

vanishes almost ev-erywhere. Its zero extension therefore defines a periodic L2 function without a boundary jump; for Sobolev inputs, the same statement holds weakly through the available derivative order. The rectangular domain then permits standard Fourier or Chebyshev discretizations. The cutoff functions χℓ define the local Hilbert spaces 

Hℓ = L2(Uℓ, d vol g), H⊕ = M

> ℓ∈I

Hℓ. (225) The associated localization isometry mapping a function from L2(M) to the local charts is defined as follows. 

Definition 4.3 (Localization map) . Define J : L2(M) → H ⊕, (Ju )ℓ = χℓu|Uℓ . (226) 

Its adjoint J † extends local sections by zero and recombines them: J†(uℓ)ℓ = ∑

> ℓ

χℓuℓ. (227) The map J is an isometry due to the partition of unity (PoU) : 

∥Ju ∥2 

> H⊕

= ∑

> ℓ
> Z
> M

χ2 

> ℓ

|u|2 d vol g = ∥u∥2 

> L2
> g

, (228) where the last equality is definitional. Moreover, J† J = I, and P = J J † is the orthogonal projector in H⊕ onto the physically consistent subspace Hphys = Ran J. The direct sum H⊕ is a redun-dant representation space, whereas Hphys is its physical subspace. A general tuple (uℓ)ℓ need not represent a global function on M.It is often preferable to move every local function to flat Lebesgue space: 

uℓ(x) 7 → ρℓ(x)1/2 uℓ(x),67 which also involves conjugating the Hamiltonian by ρ1/2 as well. For ψ ∈ L2(M), the localized state is 

Ju = ∑

> ℓ

|ℓ⟩ ⊗ | χℓu⟩. (229) Applying J† adds overlapping amplitudes introducing interference across overlapping charts. This is the main mechanism that enables recombining the results of chart-local evolutions. How-ever, directly conjugating the Hamiltonian H with J does not result in the correct dynamics. Par-ticularly, J†(L 

> ℓ

H)J = ∑ℓ χℓ Hχℓ, whose kinetic part differs from −∆g because derivatives act on the cutoffs. The potential term commutes with every χℓ. The Riemannian IMS identity supplies the required kinetic correction. 

Fact 4.4 (Riemannian IMS identity) . For u in the kinetic form domain, 

Z

> M

∥∇ u∥2 

> g

dvol g = ∑

> ℓ

Z

> M

∥∇ (χℓu)∥2 

> g

dvol g −

Z

> M

WIMS |u|2 d vol g, (230) 

where WIMS (x) = ∑

> ℓ

∥ dχℓ(x)∥2 

> g−1

. (231) 

Equivalently (assuming equality means using the above quadratic form version), then 

−∆g = ∑

> ℓ

χℓ(−∆g)χℓ − WIMS . (232) 

Proof. Expand d(χℓu) = χℓ du + u dχℓ. (233) After summing over ℓ, the | du|2 term gives ∑ℓ χ2 

> ℓ

= 1, while the cross term vanishes because 

∑ℓ χℓ dχℓ = 12 d ∑ℓ χ2 

> ℓ

= 0. The remaining cutoff-gradient term is (231). The IMS identity is standard in the analysis of Schr ¨ odinger operators and has recently been used in spectral-gap estimates [Her+25; Gri+25]. Here it instead provides an exact compressed representation of the Riemannian Hamiltonian. Put H = −∆g. For each chart, let H0 

> ℓ

denote the local realization of the differential expression 

−∆g acting on the already-localized input vℓ = χℓu. Define 

K0 := M

> ℓ

H0 

> ℓ

, M⊕ 

> WIMS

:= M

> ℓ

MWIMS |Uℓ , B := K0 − M⊕ 

> WIMS

. (234) Thus every chart block contains the pullback of the full IMS potential WIMS = ∑m ∥ dχm∥2 

> g−1

, i.e. the operator MWIMS |Uℓ multiplies by WIMS .Combining these definitions gives 

u J

7−→ (χℓu)ℓ

> B

7−→ (H(χℓu) − WIMS χℓu)ℓ

> J†

7−→ Hu . (235) Indeed, substituting the explicit adjoint gives 

J† BJu = ∑

> ℓ

χℓ H(χℓu) − WIMS ∑

> ℓ

χ2 

> ℓ

u

= ( H + WIMS ) u − WIMS u = Hu , (236) 68 where the second line uses the operator IMS identity (232) and the quadratic partition of unity. Consequently, 

J† BJ = H = −∆g (237) as an identity of quadratic forms. The negative full IMS potential is exactly what removes the localization error introduced by differentiating the cutoffs. Let BN denote B with finite energy cutoff. Then if UBN block-encodes BN /αBN , and UJ is an exact unitary extension of the isometry J, then 

Usrc, N := U† 

> J

UBN UJ (238) block encodes 

J† BN J/αBN . (239) The explicitly constructed localization oracle below instead has signal block J/αJ and therefore contributes a factor α2 

> J

to the normalization when used on both sides of a sandwich. We now present the assumed quantum access model, which begins with a chart-labelled po-tential oracle. 

Definition 4.5 (Potential over Manifold Oracle) . Let f : M → R and {(Uℓ, κℓ)}ℓ∈I be a finite atlas. An ϵ-accurate binary oracle for f is an operation O(M) 

> f

satisfying 

O(M) 

> f

|ℓ⟩| y⟩| z⟩ 7 → | ℓ⟩| y⟩| z ⊕ ef (κ−1 

> ℓ

(y)) ⟩, ℓ ∈ I , y ∈ Ωℓ

where | f (κ−1 

> ℓ

(y)) − ef (κ−1 

> ℓ

(y)) | < ϵ.

Note that this local-coordinates presentation is consistent as if yℓ, yℓ′ ∈ R encode the same point lying in Uℓ ∩ Uℓ′ , then κ−1 

> ℓ

(yℓ) = κ−1 

> ℓ′

(yℓ′ ).We also require additional oracles provide the coordinate maps, metric components, and local volume densities. 

Definition 4.6 (Manifold Geometry Oracles) . For an atlas {(Uℓ, κℓ)}ℓ∈I , the manifold geometry oracles are chart-labelled coordinate oracles 

O(M) 

> κ

|ℓ⟩| x⟩ 7 → | ℓ⟩| κℓ(x)⟩O(M) 

> g

|ℓ⟩| i⟩| j⟩| y⟩| 0⟩ 7 → | ℓ⟩| i⟩| j⟩| y⟩| gij 

> [ℓ]

(y)⟩,

O(M) 

> ρ

|ℓ⟩| y⟩| 0⟩ 7 → | ℓ⟩| y⟩| ρ[ℓ](y)⟩,

where y ∈ Ωℓ and ρ[ℓ](y) = 

q

det (g[ℓ],ij (y)) .

Definition 4.7 (Subordinate Atlas Oracle) . Let {χℓ}ℓ∈I be a PoU subordinate to a locally-finite atlas 

{(Uℓ, κℓ)}ℓ∈I on (M, g). The triplet (O(M) 

> χ

, O(M) 

> ch 1

, O(M) 

> ch 2

) form a subordinate atlas oracle for M if ∀x ∈M:

O(M) 

> χ

|ℓ⟩| x⟩| 0⟩ 7 → | ℓ⟩| x⟩| χℓ(x)⟩O(M) 

> ch 1

|x⟩| 0⟩ 7 → | x⟩| Nch (x)⟩O(M) 

> ch 2

|x⟩| j⟩ 7 → | x⟩| ℓj⟩,

where N ch (x) is the number of overlapping charts containing x, ℓj ∈ I indicates the j ∈ [Nch (x)] chart containing x. 

69 Let αJ =

q

sup x∈M Nch (x). Using the subordinate-atlas oracles, prepare a uniform superposi-tion over the charts containing x, query χℓr (x), and apply a controlled rotation whose clean am-plitude is pNch (x)χℓr (x)/αJ . This amplitude has absolute value at most one. After uncomputing the auxiliary registers the result is 

|x⟩| 0⟩ 7 −→ | x⟩ 1

αJNch (x)

# ∑

> r=1

χℓr (x)|ℓr ⟩| 0⟩ + | ⊥ x ⟩.Since χℓ(x) = 0 outside Uℓ, the resulting unitary UJ block encodes 

(I ⊗ ⟨ 0|)UJ (I ⊗ | 0⟩) = J

αJ

. (240) Thus UJ is an αJ -normalized block encoding of J.The IMS-corrected operator is block diagonal before compression by J† and J. Its input in block 

ℓ is already the localized function vℓ = ( Jψ)ℓ = χℓψ; no second factor of χℓ is inserted inside the differential expression. Write 

f[ℓ](y) := f (κ−1 

> ℓ

(y)) , W[ℓ](y) := WIMS (κ−1 

> ℓ

(y)) ,

Cij 

> [ℓ]

(y) := ρ[ℓ](y)gij 

> [ℓ]

(y), Vℓ(t, y) := b(t) f[ℓ](y) − a(t)Wℓ(y). (241) The full local block corresponding to the geometric Hamiltonian is 

Hℓ(t)v = −a(t)ρ−1 

> [ℓ]

∂i



Cij 

> [ℓ]

∂jv



+ Vℓ(t)v. (242) With these definitions, J†(L 

> ℓ

Hℓ(t)) J = H(t) (under taking quadratic forms). To pass from L2(Ωℓ, ρℓ dy) to flat Lebesgue space, use the unitary 

Uρ,ℓv = ρ1/2  

> [ℓ]

v, U−1 

> ρ,ℓ

q = ρ−1/2  

> [ℓ]

q. (243) Put h[ℓ] := ρ−1/2  

> [ℓ]

and write M f for multiplication by f . The conjugated operator is 

eHℓ(t) := Uρ,ℓ Hℓ(t)U−1

> ρ,ℓ

= −a(t)Mhℓ ∂i MCij 

> ℓ

∂j Mhℓ + MVℓ (t). (244) Fix real smooth periodic extensions of hℓ, Cℓ, fℓ, and Wℓ from a neighborhood of the localized support to Td. Assume the extended hℓ is bounded away from zero, the extended matrix Cℓ is real symmetric and uniformly positive definite, and the extended potentials are bounded. The kinetic quadratic form 

kℓ[q] :=

> d

# ∑

> i,j=1

D

∂i(hℓq), Cij  

> ℓ

∂j(hℓq)

E  

> L2(Td)

, q ∈ H1(Td),is closed and nonnegative. The local kinetic operator is defined as its Friedrichs operator. Under the displayed smoothness and ellipticity assumptions its domain is H2(Td), and on that domain it equals Mhℓ ∑i,j ∂† 

> i

MCij 

> ℓ

∂j Mhℓ , with ∂† 

> i

= −∂i. For real a(t), b(t), the full local operator is self-adjoint 70 on H2(Td) whenever a(t)̸ = 0, by bounded perturbation of the kinetic operator. If a(t) = 0, it is the bounded multiplication operator b(t) fℓ on its maximal domain L2(Td). In either case, its quadratic-form expression is well-defined on the common form domain H1(Td). Half-density conjugation leaves this multiplication potential unchanged. Within each coordinate chart, the local operator is spectrally truncated using a Fourier–Galerkin method. Let 

ek(y) = e−i2πk·y.Opposite faces of S are identified, thereby imposing artificial periodic boundary conditions, and the local Fourier unitary is defined by 

(UFT ,ℓq)k :=

Z

> S

ek(y)q(y) dy, k ∈ Zd

(UFT ,ℓq)k =⇒ bq ∈ ℓ2(Zd).The support condition in Definition 4.2 makes each localized input ψ[ℓ]χ[ℓ] vanish in a collar of the box boundary. Consequently, its periodic extension has no boundary jump, and the local half-density admits the Fourier representation 

[Uρ,ℓ(χ[ℓ]ψ[ℓ])]( y) = ∑

> k∈Zd

(UFT ,ℓUρ,ℓχ[ℓ]ψ[ℓ])kek(y), with equality in L2(Td). (245) A general tuple (qℓ)ℓ∈I with qℓ ∈ L2(S, d y) need not arise from a single ψ ∈ L2(M), because its representatives may be inconsistent on chart overlaps. The synthesis map J† recombines an arbitrary tuple, whereas J J † is the orthogonal projection onto the consistent subspace Hphys .With the fixed periodic extensions and self-adjoint realizations specified above, define 

Λℓ,j := diag k∈Zd

 i2πkj

 , bMc := UFT ,ℓ McU†

> FT ,ℓ

. (246) Then the Fourier-space operator is 

bHℓ(t) = a(t) bMhℓ

> d

# ∑

> i,j=1

Λ† 

> ℓ,i

bMCij 

> ℓ

Λℓ,j

!bMhℓ + bMVℓ (t). (247) This is precisely UFT ,ℓ eHℓ(t)U† 

> FT ,ℓ

and is self-adjoint on the Fourier image of the periodic H2 do-main. In particular, the two derivative multipliers occur as Λ† 

> ℓ,i

and Λℓ,j, and both exterior density factors are hℓ = ρ−1/2  

> ℓ

.The Galerkin spectral error is analyzed chart by chart for each eHℓ(t). Let A = {ek : k ∈ Zd},

AN = {ek : ∥k∥∞ ≤ N}, and let PN be the orthogonal projection of L2(Td) onto VN := span AN .Identify the redundant chart space with its flat half-density realization and write 

∥w∥2 

> Hr
> box (S)

:= ∑

> |α|≤ r

∥∂αw∥2 

> L2(S)

,

∥w∥2  

> Hr
> per (Td)

:= ∑

> k∈Zd

(1 + 4π2 ∥k∥22)r | bw(k)|2 .71 The first is the ordinary Sobolev norm on the box. The second is the periodic Fourier Sobolev norm. In the Fourier estimates below, the shorthand Hr (S) means Hr

> per

(Td); arbitrary chart pull-backs are measured in Hr

> box

(S) until localization gives a periodic extension. 

H⊕ := M

> ℓ∈I

L2(S, d y), ∥q∥2 

> Hr
> ⊕

:= ∑

> ℓ∈I

∥qℓ∥2  

> Hr
> per (Td)

, (248) 

(T u)ℓ(y) := ρℓ(y)1/2 χℓ(κ−1 

> ℓ

(y)) u(κ−1 

> ℓ

(y)) . (249) For an integer s ≥ 0, define the full covariant Sobolev norm by 

∥v∥2  

> Hsg(M)

:=

> s

# ∑

> m=0
> Z
> M

|∇ mv(x)|2 

> g⊗m

d vol g(x), (250) where ∇0v = v, ∇v = dv, and ∇mv is the mth covariant derivative of the scalar field. For m ≥ 1, its pointwise tensor norm is 

|∇ mv|2 

> g⊗m

:= gi1 j1 · · · gim jm (∇mv)i1··· im (∇mv)j1··· jm . (251) The argument (M) is omitted when the underlying manifold is clear; on Uℓ the same definition is used with the integral restricted to Uℓ.Let eH := L2(S, d y), and eH⊕ := eH⊕|I| . The quadratic partition of unity and the half-density factor make T : L2

> g

(M) → eH⊕ an isometry. We choose a common spectral cutoff N for every chart, with 

P⊕ 

> N

:= M

> ℓ∈I

PN .With 

eH⊕(t) := M

> ℓ∈I

eHℓ(t), (252) the IMS identity gives the exact continuum compression 

H(t) = T † eH⊕(t)T . (253) The ideal continuum Fourier–Galerkin approximation considered in this subsection is therefore 

HcFG  

> N

(t) := T † P⊕ 

> N

eH⊕(t)P⊕ 

> N

T . (254) It is self-adjoint. Notice that the evolving state is still a physical state in L2

> g

(M, dvol g); the finite direct-sum Fourier space is internal to the generator. This above Fourier–Galerkin construction is what we refer to as the coherent-chart method. The following analysis gives conditions under which its cutoff N is polynomial in d.

4.1 Analysis of the coherent chart algorithm in continuous space 

Although (254) has finite Fourier cutoff, it remains a continuum operator because the projections are exact. This subsection bounds the cutoff in that model; the subsequent subsection introduces a grid and works in a digital model. 72 Let u and ucFG  

> N

denote the exact and continuum Fourier–Galerkin evolutions: 

i∂tu(t) = H(t)u(t), u(0) = u0, (255) 

i∂tucFG  

> N

(t) = HcFG  

> N

(t)ucFG  

> N

(t), ucFG  

> N

(0) = u0. (256) The following product estimate controls the Sobolev norms required in the Galerkin analysis. 

Lemma 4.8. Let r ≥ 0 be an integer. If a ∈ Wr,∞(Td) and v ∈ Hr

> per

(Td), then 

∥av ∥Hr  

> per (Td)

≤ Ld,r ∥a∥Wr,∞ (S) ∥v∥Hr  

> per (Td)

., (257) 

If instead v ∈ Hr

> box

(S) and supp a int S, then the zero extension of av belongs to H r

> per

(Td) and satisfies 

∥av ∥Hr  

> per (Td)

≤ Ld,r ∥a∥Wr,∞ (S) ∥v∥Hr 

> box (S)

. (258) 

where Ld,r :=

"

r!

d + rr

 r

# ∑

> m=0

4m

d + m − 1

m

#1/2 

.

Proof. For a multi-index α ∈ Nd, write |α| = α1 + · · · + αd and define 

∥w∥2  

> Dr(S)

:= ∑

> |α|≤ r

∥∂αw∥22 . (259) Expanding the Fourier weight by the binomial and multinomial theorems gives 

∥w∥2  

> Hr(S)

= ∑

> k∈Zd
> r

# ∑

> m=0

 rm



# ∑

> |α|=m

m

α



(2π)2mk2α | bw(k)|2

≤ r! ∑

> |α|≤ r

∥∂αw∥22 = r! ∥w∥2  

> Dr(S)

, (260) because ( rm)( m 

> α

) = r!/ [α!(r − m)!] ≤ r!. Conversely, for every |α| ≤ r,

(2π)2|α|k2α ≤



1 + 4π2 ∥k∥22

r

.The stars-and-bars count gives #{α ∈ Nd : |α| ≤ r} =

d + rr



.The preceding pointwise frequency bound and this count therefore imply 

∥w∥2  

> Dr(S)

≤

d + rr



∥w∥2  

> Hr(S)

. (261) The weak multi-index Leibniz rule gives 

∂α(av ) = ∑

> β≤α

αβ



(∂β a)∂α−βv.73 Since ∑β≤α (αβ) = 2|α|, the triangle inequality implies 

∥∂α(av )∥2 ≤ 2|α| ∥a∥Wr,∞ (S) ∥v∥Dr (S) . (262) Summing its square over |α| ≤ r and grouping by m = |α| yields 

∥av ∥2  

> Dr(S)

≤

" r

# ∑

> m=0

4m

d + m − 1

m

#

∥a∥2  

> Wr,∞(S)

∥v∥2  

> Dr(S)

. (263) Combining (260), (261), and (263) proves (257). For the localized statement, the weak Leibniz rule gives the same multi-index estimate on S. Since a has compact support in the interior, av has zero trace through order r − 1 (normal derivatives on the boundary to order r − 1 vanish) and so its zero extension belongs to Hr

> per

(Td). Applying (260) to that extension and using ∥v∥Dr (S) = ∥v∥Hr

> box (S)

proves (258). The following is one of the main results of this section, which bounds the Galerkin method error in terms of manifold properties and the evolved-state’s Sobolev norm. 

Theorem 4.9 (Coherent Charts Method Galerkin Error) . Let s ≥ 3 be an integer, let a , b ∈ L1([ 0, T]; R),and let f be real-valued. Assume that the exact and Galerkin generators defined above are self-adjoint and generate unitary propagators on a common domain (when evaluated via inner products). Suppose the fixed periodic coefficient extensions have the regularity appearing below and that the exact solution satisfies 

Us(T) := sup 

> 0≤t≤T

∥u(t)∥Hsg < ∞, (264) 

Define the ordinary-box chart distortion constant Cκ,ℓ,s(g) := sup    

> 0̸=z∈Hsg(Uℓ)

z ◦ κ−1 

> ℓHs
> box (S)

∥z∥Hsg (Uℓ )

(265) 

and assume these constants are finite. Then 

sup 

> 0≤t≤T

u(t) − ucFG  

> N

(t) 2 ≤ Cgeom   

> T,s

Us(T)

h

A1

 Kgeom  

> s

+ Kgeom 2

 (1 + 4π2(N + 1)2)−(s−2)/2 (266) 

+ Vgeom  

> s

(T)( 1 + 4π2(N + 1)2)−s/2 i

, (267) 

where Cgeom   

> T,s

:= sup 

> ℓ∈I

L2

> d,s

q

|I|∥ ρ1/2  

> [ℓ]

∥Ws,∞ (S)∥χ[ℓ]∥Ws,∞ (S)Cκ,ℓ,s(g)

Kgeom 2 := sup 

> ℓ∈I

6d2 h[ℓ] 

> 2
> W2, ∞

max  

> i,j

Cij  

> ℓW1, ∞

Kgeom  

> s

:= sup 

> ℓ∈I

d2 Ld,s Ld,s−1 Ld,s−2 ∥hℓ∥2 

> Ws,∞

max  

> i,j

Cij  

> ℓWs−1, ∞

Vgeom  

> s

(T) := B1 Ld,s sup 

> ℓ∈I

∥ f[ℓ]∥Ws,∞ (S) + sup 

> ℓ∈I

∥ f[ℓ]∥∞

!

+A1 Ld,s sup 

> ℓ∈I

∥Wℓ∥Ws,∞ (S) + sup 

> ℓ∈I

∥Wℓ∥∞

!

.74 are all also assumed to be finite. Proof. Set q(t) := T u(t) and EN := ( I − P⊕ 

> N

)T . The exact generator defect has the two-sided decomposition 

H(t) − HcFG  

> N

(t) = E† 

> N

eH⊕(t)T + ( P⊕ 

> N

T )† eH⊕(t)EN . (268) The first term is the output, or test-side, Fourier tail. The second is the trial-side consistency tail on which the second-order operator acts. From Duhamel’s formula, sup 

> 0≤t≤T

u(t) − ucFG  

> N

(t) 2 ≤

Z T

> 0

h

(I − P⊕ 

> N

) eH⊕(t)q(t) ⊕

+ eH⊕(t)( I − P⊕ 

> N

)q(t) ⊕

i

dt. (269) For 0 ≤ r ≤ s,

∥(I − PN )q∥2 

> Hr
> per

= ∑ 

> ∥k∥∞≥N+1

(1 + 4π2 ∥k∥22)r |bq(k)|2

≤ (1 + 4π2(N + 1)2)−(s−r) ∑ 

> ∥k∥∞≥N+1

(1 + 4π2 ∥k∥22)s |bq(k)|2

≤ (1 + 4π2(N + 1)2)−(s−r) ∥q∥2 

> Hs
> per

.Consequently, 

(I − P⊕ 

> N

)q(t) Hr

> ⊕

≤ (1 + 4π2(N + 1)2)−(s−r)/2 ∥q(t)∥Hs 

> ⊕

. (270) Expand the local Hamiltonian blocks as 

eH⊕(t) = a(t)K⊕ + M⊕

> V(t)

, Vℓ(t) = b(t) fℓ − a(t)Wℓ,The two residual terms therefore satisfy 

(I − P⊕ 

> N

) eH⊕(t)q(t) ⊕ ≤ | a(t)|∥ (I − P⊕ 

> N

)K⊕q(t)∥⊕ + ∥(I − P⊕ 

> N

)M⊕

> V(t)

q(t)∥⊕

eH⊕(t)( I − P⊕ 

> N

)q(t) ⊕ ≤ | a(t)|∥K ⊕(I − P⊕ 

> N

)q(t)∥⊕ + ∥M⊕

> V(t)

(I − P⊕ 

> N

)q(t)∥⊕.For r ≥ 2, let us define the operator norms: 

K⊕,r := K⊕ 

> Hr
> ⊕→Hr−2
> ⊕

, Vr (t) := sup 

> ℓ

∥Vℓ(t)∥Wr,∞ (S) .Then combining the above with Lemma 4.8 

(I − P⊕ 

> N

)K⊕q(t) ⊕≤ (1 + 4π2(N + 1)2)−(s−2)/2 K⊕,s ∥q(t)∥Hs 

> ⊕

,

K⊕(I − P⊕ 

> N

)q(t) ⊕≤ (1 + 4π2(N + 1)2)−(s−2)/2 K⊕,2 ∥q(t)∥Hs 

> ⊕

,

(I − P⊕ 

> N

)M⊕

> V(t)

q(t) ⊕≤ (1 + 4π2(N + 1)2)−s/2 Ld,sVs(t) ∥q(t)∥Hs 

> ⊕

,

M⊕

> V(t)

(I − P⊕ 

> N

)q(t) ⊕≤ (1 + 4π2(N + 1)2)−s/2 V0(t) ∥q(t)∥Hs 

> ⊕

.75 The kinetic operator norms are bounded first at order r = 2 and then at general order. For the r = 2 estimate, initially take u ∈ C∞

> per

(S). The local kinetic block is again (244). Since ∂i is anti-Hermitian on the torus, define 

Kℓu := Mhℓ

> d

# ∑

> i,j=1

∂† 

> i

MCij 

> ℓ

∂j Mhℓ u

= −hℓ

> d

# ∑

> i,j=1

∂i



Cij  

> ℓ

∂j(hℓu)



, K⊕ := M

> ℓ

Kℓ. (271) The ordinary product rule applied to (271) gives 

Kℓu = −

> d

# ∑

> i,j=1

hℓ

h

(∂iCij  

> ℓ

)hℓ∂ju + ( ∂iCij  

> ℓ

)( ∂jhℓ)u + Cij  

> ℓ

hℓ∂i∂ju

+ Cij  

> ℓ

(∂i hℓ)∂ju + Cij  

> ℓ

(∂jhℓ)∂iu + Cij  

> ℓ

(∂i∂jhℓ)u

i

. (272) Every coefficient multiplying u, a first derivative of u, or a second derivative of u has supremum norm at most 

∥hℓ∥2 

> W2, ∞

max  

> i,j

Cij   

> ℓW1, ∞

. (273) Moreover, each of ∥u∥2, ∥∂iu∥2, and ∂i∂ju 2 is at most ∥u∥H2 under the Fourier Sobolev norm. The triangle inequality over the six displayed terms and the d2 index pairs therefore yields 

∥K ℓu∥2 ≤ 6d2 ∥hℓ∥2 

> W2, ∞

max  

> i,j

Cij   

> ℓW1, ∞

∥u∥H2 . (274) Density of C∞

> per

(S) in H2(S) extends this estimate to all u ∈ H2(S). Squaring, summing over charts, and using the coefficient envelopes then gives 

K⊕,2 ≤ sup 

> ℓ∈I

6d2 ∥hℓ∥2 

> W2, ∞

max  

> i,j

Cij   

> ℓW1, ∞

. (275) For general r ≥ 2, the Fourier Sobolev norm gives, for every integer m ≥ 1, 

∂jz 2 

> Hm−1(S)

= ∑

> k∈Zd



1 + 4π2 ∥k∥22

m−1

4π2k2 

> j

|bz(k)|2

≤ ∑

> k∈Zd



1 + 4π2 ∥k∥22

m

|bz(k)|2 = ∥z∥2  

> Hm(S)

. (276) Thus both ∂j : Hm → Hm−1 and ∂† 

> i

: Hm → Hm−1 have norm at most one. Fix a chart ℓ, indices i, j, and u ∈ Hr (S), where r ≥ 2. Applying Lemma 4.8 successively from the rightmost factor gives 

Mhℓ u Hr ≤ Ld,r ∥hℓ∥Wr,∞ ∥u∥Hr ,

∂j Mhℓ u Hr−1 ≤ Ld,r ∥hℓ∥Wr,∞ ∥u∥Hr ,

MCij 

> ℓ

∂j Mhℓ u Hr−1 ≤ Ld,r−1 Ld,r Cij   

> ℓWr−1, ∞

∥hℓ∥Wr,∞ ∥u∥Hr ,

∂† 

> i

MCij 

> ℓ

∂j Mhℓ u Hr−2 ≤ Ld,r−1 Ld,r Cij   

> ℓWr−1, ∞

∥hℓ∥Wr,∞ ∥u∥Hr .76 One final application of (257), now at order r − 2, gives 

Mhℓ ∂† 

> i

MCij 

> ℓ

∂j Mhℓ u Hr−2

≤ Ld,r−2 Ld,r−1 Ld,r ∥hℓ∥Wr−2, ∞ Cij   

> ℓWr−1, ∞

∥hℓ∥Wr,∞ ∥u∥Hr . (277) The factors Ld,r, Ld,r−1, and Ld,r−2 therefore come from, respectively, the inner multiplication by hℓ,the middle multiplication by Cij  

> ℓ

, and the outer multiplication by hℓ. The derivatives only lower the Sobolev order and add no constant in this Fourier normalization. Summing (277) over the d2 index pairs gives 

∥K ℓu∥Hr−2 ≤ d2 Ld,r Ld,r−1 Ld,r−2 ∥hℓ∥Wr,∞ ∥hℓ∥Wr−2, ∞

× max  

> i,j

Cij   

> ℓWr−1, ∞

∥u∥Hr .Note ∥hℓ∥Wr−2, ∞ ≤ ∥ hℓ∥Wr,∞ . Finally, for q = ( qℓ)ℓ ∈ Hr

> ⊕

,

K⊕q 2

> Hr−2
> ⊕

= ∑

> ℓ

∥K ℓqℓ∥2

> Hr−2

≤ sup 

> ℓ∈I

∥K ℓ∥Hr →Hr−2

!2

# ∑

> ℓ

∥qℓ∥2 

> Hr

. (278) Consequently, 

K⊕,r ≤ sup 

> ℓ∈I

d2 Ld,r Ld,r−1 Ld,r−2 ∥hℓ∥2 

> Wr,∞

max  

> i,j

Cij   

> ℓWr−1, ∞

. (279) Next bound the potential operator now. For r = 0, s, the identity Vℓ(t) = b(t) fℓ − a(t)Wℓ and the triangle inequality for the Wr,∞ norm give, chart by chart, 

∥Vℓ(t)∥Wr,∞ (S) = ∥b(t) fℓ − a(t)Wℓ∥Wr,∞ (S)

≤ | b(t)| ∥ fℓ∥Wr,∞ (S) + |a(t)| ∥ Wℓ∥Wr,∞ (S) . (280) Taking the supremum over ℓ yields 

Vr (t) ≤ | b(t)| sup 

> ℓ∈I

∥ fℓ∥Wr,∞ (S) + |a(t)| sup 

> ℓ∈I

∥Wℓ∥Wr,∞ (S), r = 0, s.To compare the direct-sum Sobolev norm with the intrinsic (covariant) Sobolev norm on M,put 

ϑℓ(y) := ρ[ℓ](y)1/2 χℓ(κ−1 

> ℓ

(y)) .For v ∈ Hsg(M), let vℓ := v|Uℓ . The definition of T gives the chartwise identity 

(T v)ℓ = ϑℓ(vℓ ◦ κ−1 

> ℓ

). (281) Applying the localized product estimate (258) with r = s, followed by the definition of Cκ,ℓ,s(g),yields 

∥(T v)ℓ∥Hs  

> per (Td)

≤ Ld,s ∥ϑℓ∥Ws,∞ (S) vℓ ◦ κ−1 

> ℓHs
> box (S)

≤ Ld,s ∥ϑℓ∥Ws,∞ (S) Cκ,ℓ,s(g) ∥vℓ∥Hsg (Uℓ ) . (282) 77 Square this inequality and sum over the orthogonal chart blocks. Since the covariant Sobolev norm in (250) has a nonnegative integrand at every derivative order, restriction to Uℓ gives ∥vℓ∥Hsg (Uℓ ) ≤∥v∥Hsg (M). Therefore 

∥T v∥2 

> Hs
> ⊕

= ∑

> ℓ∈I

∥(T v)ℓ∥2 

> Hs(S)

≤ L2 

> d,s

# ∑

> ℓ∈I



∥ϑℓ∥Ws,∞ (S) Cκ,ℓ,s(g)

2

∥vℓ∥2  

> Hsg(Uℓ)

≤ L2

> d,s

"

# ∑

> ℓ∈I



∥ϑℓ∥Ws,∞ (S) Cκ,ℓ,s(g)

2

#

∥v∥2  

> Hsg(M)

. (283) Taking square roots proves the required bound with 

∥T ∥ Hsg →Hs 

> ⊕

≤ Ld,s

"

# ∑

> ℓ∈I



∥ϑℓ∥Ws,∞ (S) Cκ,ℓ,s(g)

2

#1/2 

≤ sup 

> ℓ∈I

L2

> d,s

q

|I|∥ ρ1/2  

> [ℓ]

∥Ws,∞ (S)∥χ[ℓ]∥Ws,∞ (S)Cκ,ℓ,s(g). (284) The following quantities state sufficient conditions for a spectral cutoff N polynomial in d:

F = sup 

> ℓ∈|I|

max 



∥ f[ℓ]∥Ws,∞ (S), ∥ f[ℓ]∥∞



, W = sup 

> ℓ∈|I|

max 



∥W[ℓ]∥Ws,∞ (S), ∥W[ℓ]∥∞



,

H = sup 

> ℓ∈|I|

∥h[ℓ]∥Ws,∞ (S), R = sup 

> ℓ∈|I|

∥ρ1/2  

> [ℓ]

∥Ws,∞ (S), X = sup 

> ℓ∈|I|

∥χ[ℓ]∥Ws,∞ (S),

C = sup 

> ℓ∈|I|

max 

> i,j



∥Cij 

> [ℓ]

∥Ws−1, ∞ (S)



, D = max  

> ℓ

Cκ,ℓ,s(g).

Corollary 4.10 (Polynomial Energy Cutoff) . Suppose the following conditions hold: |I| , F, W, H, R, X, C, D,Cgeom   

> T,s

, Us(T), A1, and B 1 are all O([ poly (d)] d) when s = Θ(d). Then there is a polynomial p such that choosing N ≥ p(d) max 

n

1, ϵ−1/ (s−2)o

(285) 

gives 

sup 

> 0≤t≤T

u(t) − ucFG  

> N

(t) 2 = O(ϵ).

In particular, N = poly (d) for fixed target accuracy. Proof. The first term in Theorem 4.9 decays as N−(s−2), while the second term decays faster as 

N−s. Taking the (s − 2)th root of the assumed prefactor gives a polynomial in d when s = Θ(d),which proves (285). The reason that we considered the continuous model is that discretization introduces an addi-tional obstacle: overlapping charts need not have intersecting local grids. A global source inter-polant transfers one coefficient representation to all local grids. For a general high-dimensional manifold this map may be inefficient; the factorized construction below is conditional on constant-dimensional product structure and explicit implementation assumptions. 78 4.2 Tensor products of manifolds and a discretized algorithm 

This subsection presents a discretized version of the preceding algorithm for tensor products of constant-dimensional manifolds. The low-order geometric parameters of the factors are assumed to be bounded uniformly in the number of factors. Under the approximation assumptions stated below, the local Fourier cutoff is polynomially bounded for fixed target accuracy. This cutoff theorem is not, by itself, a polynomial-runtime theorem: such a result additionally requires poly-nomial bounds on the source-space dimensions, block-encoding costs, oracle costs, and integrated Hamiltonian normalizations. Consider the product setting 

M =

> m

# ∏

> ν=1

Mν, dim Mν = pν ≤ p0 = O(1), d =

> m

# ∑

> ν=1

pν, g =

> mM
> ν=1

gν. (286) Then m ≤ d ≤ p0m, every local approximation problem has dimension at most p0, and the product metric makes the kinetic operator a Kronecker sum. The factor geometries are assumed to satisfy the uniform bounds stated below, independently of ν and the total dimension. For each factor, fix a box-adapted atlas {(U(ν) 

> a

, κ(ν) 

> a

) : a ∈ I ν} with a box-adapted subordinate POU {χ(ν) 

> a

}a∈I ν (Definition 4.2). Define the full factorwise IMS potential 

Wν(xν) := ∑

> a∈I ν

dχ(ν) 

> a

(xν) 2

> g−1
> ν

. (287) A product chart is indexed by a = ( a1, . . . , am), with 

κa =

> m

# ∏

> ν=1

κ(ν) 

> aν

, χa(x) = 

> m

# ∏

> ν=1

χ(ν) 

> aν

(xν). (288) The product cutoff is again a quadratic partition. After grouping chart and coordinate registers by factor, the localization and half-density maps factor as 

J =

> mO
> ν=1

Jν, T =

> mO
> ν=1

Tν, ρa(y) = 

> m

# ∏

> ν=1

ρ(ν) 

> aν

(yν). (289) Discretization introduces a challenge that was absent from the continuum: even if two product charts overlap, their local Fourier grids need not intersect. A global source interpolant resolves this mismatch. For a general high-dimensional manifold that interpolation may be computationally expensive; however for (286), it can be assembled coherently from constant-dimensional factor interpolants. We do not select a particular global interpolation basis. However, one such option is com-pactly supported wavelets. The result instead assumes stated approximation and implementation properties of the source spaces and derives a cutoff bound contingent on those properties. The first part of this section will state the algorithm, while the second part is dedicated to the error analysis. 79 4.2.1 Digital Coherent-Charts Method 

The aforementioned global interpolation basis defines a Hilbert space of achievable wavefunctions that globally approximate the true wave function via an interpolation from a fix set of points on the manifold. Each component ν is given a separate interpolating basis, whose span is referred to as the source space .For each ν Choose an L2(Mν)-orthonormal basis Yν := {L(ν) 

> qν

}qν ∈X ν of global interpolating functions. For each factor let the finite-dimensional source space 

Vsrc  

> ν,Rν

⊂ Hσ0 (Mν), σ0 > max {2, p0/2 }, (290) be the complex span of Yν. By Sobolev embedding, each source function then has a continuous representative, so the point evaluations used below are well-defined. Thus the interpolating basis for the overall manifold M is just the tensor product of the component global interpolating bases. Each source space is associated with a parameter Rν that we call the resolution parameter . The resolution parameter is directly related to the interpolation error, as will be shown later, and the number of basis functions and grid points is usually a function of Rν.Let Qν,Rν be the L2-orthogonal projector onto the corresponding source space. The product source space and projector are 

Vsrc  

> R

=

> m

O

> ν=1

Vsrc  

> ν,Rν

, Qsrc  

> R

=

> m

O

> ν=1

Qν,Rν . (291) The coefficient space Hsrc  

> ν,Rν

= C|Y ν | defines the reconstruction maps 

Eν,Rν : Hsrc  

> ν,Rν

→ Vsrc  

> ν,Rν

, ER : Hsrc  

> R

→ Vsrc  

> R

, ER =

> m

O

> ν=1

Eν,Rν . (292) Specifically, for |c⟩ := ∑q∈∏ν Xv cq|q⟩ ∈ H src  

> R

= Nm 

> ν=1

Hsrc  

> ν,Rν

,

[ER|c⟩]( x) = ∑ 

> q∈∏νXv

cq Lq1 (x1) · · · Lqm (xm) ∈ Vsrc  

> R

.Each factor chart carries an independent uniform grid G(ν) 

> a,Nν

and an independent discrete Fourier transform. For curved manifolds, the pullbacks of two such grids may be disjoint even when the charts overlap. Evaluation of the common source basis on every grid removes any requirement that the grids themselves intersect. In chart a of manifold Mν, let the grid by defined by 

r ∈ G (ν) 

> a,Nν

:= Bν,Nν := {− Nν, . . . , Nν − 1}pν , y(ν) 

> a,r

:= r

2Nν

, (293) where x(ν) 

> a,r

:= ( κ(ν) 

> a

)−1(y(ν) 

> a,r

). For each grid point, we define the following matrices 

(E(ν) 

> a

)rq := L(ν) 

> q

(x(ν) 

> a,r

),

(D(ν) 

> a

)rr := ( 2Nν)−pν /2 [ρ(ν) 

> a

(y(ν) 

> a,r

)] 1/2 χ(ν) 

> a

(x(ν) 

> a,r

),

R(ν) 

> a

:= D(ν) 

> a

E(ν) 

> a

. (294) 80 For a vector |c⟩ ∈ H src  

> ν,Rν

, E(ν) 

> a

evaluates Eν,Rν |c⟩ on all grid points x(ν) 

> a,r

associated with chart a. The diagonal matrix D(ν) 

> a

does a few things. First, it applies a discretized version of the map T from the previous section, which for single chart is just multiplication by χ(ν) 

> a

. Second, it multiplies by 

[ρ(ν) 

> a

]1/2 to go from L2(κ(ν) 

> a

(U(ν) 

> a

), ρ(ν) 

> a

dy) to L2(κ(ν) 

> a

(U(ν) 

> a

), d y), like done in the previous section. Finally, it applies the sample normalization (2Nν)−pν /2 . With the unitary tensor-product DFT convention 

(F(ν) 

> a,Nν

z)k := ( 2Nν)−pν /2 ∑

> r∈B ν,Nν

zr e−2πik ·r/(2Nν ), k ∈ B ν,Nν ,these normalized samples produce the discrete coefficients defined in (389). Thus in total R(ν)

> a

takes an element of ψ ∈ Vsrc  

> ν,Rν

and maps it to a discrete Fourier approximation to the Fourier projection ( PN ) of [ρ(ν) 

> a

]1/2 χ(ν) 

> a

ψ, i.e. the q function from the previous section. Note like in the global spectral methods section, the number of grids points and retained Fourier coefficients can differ, to combat aliasing. Then, taking the direct sum over all charts in single component manifold gives 

Aν := M

> a∈I ν

R(ν) 

> a

. (295) and thus globally 

A :=

> m

O

> ν=1

Aν.This is a discrete-grid version of T . Let F(ν) 

> a,L

be the unitary DFT on the (2L)pν -point grid and define the spectral differentiation matrices by 

D(ν) 

> a,L,j

:= ( F(ν) 

> a,L

)† diag k∈B ν,L (2πik j)F(ν) 

> a,L

. (296) For a grid size L, define the raw chart block 

Ba,L := Mh(ν)

> a
> pν

# ∑

> i,j=1

(D(ν)

> a,L,i

)† MC(ν),ij a

D(ν) 

> a,L,j

Mh(ν)

> a

− MW(ν)

> a

, W(ν) 

> a

:= Wν ◦ (κ(ν) 

> a

)−1. (297) Choose an implementation grid size Npad ≥ N. Let ZN→Npad embed the retained Fourier coeffi-cients indexed by Bν,N into those indexed by Bν,Npad by zero padding, and set 

Z(ν) 

> a

:= ( F(ν) 

> a,Npad

)† ZN→Npad F(ν) 

> a,N

. (298) The implemented padded kinetic block is 

Bpad  

> ν,N

:= M

> a∈I ν

(Z(ν) 

> a

)† Ba,Npad Z(ν) 

> a

. (299) The source-space kinetic operator is therefore defined by 

Ksrc  

> ν,Rν,N

:= A† 

> ν

Bpad  

> ν,N

Aν. (300) 81 The purpose of this padding will be to remove one source of aliasing error using a technique from Section 3.2. Over the full tensor product, define 

Ksrc  

> R,N

:=

> m

# ∑

> ν=1

Ksrc  

> ν,Rν,Nν

⊗ I−ν.For a = ( a1, . . . , am) and r = ( r1, . . . , rm), put 

xa,r :=



x(1) 

> a1,r1

, . . . , x(m)

> am,rm



∈

> m

# ∏

> ν=1

U(ν) 

> aν

, (301) and define a global potential operator that acts as 

M⊕  

> f,N

|a, r⟩ := f (xa,r ) |a, r⟩ . (302) Assume access to the binary evaluation oracle 

Of |a, r, z⟩ = |a, r, z ⊕ f (xa,r )⟩ , (303) with ∥ f ∥∞ ≤ Λ f . Define 

Msrc   

> f,R,N

:= A† M⊕  

> f,N

A. (304) The fully discrete Hamiltonian is the following Hamiltonian on the source coefficient space: 

Hsrc  

> R,N

(t) := a(t)Ksrc  

> R,N

+ b(t)Msrc   

> f,R,N

, (305) which is the discrete analog of (253). This is a finite dimensional Hamiltonian acting on Hsrc  

> R

,which can be simulated used standard time-dependent Hamiltonian simulation techniques, e.g. [LW18]. However, unlike the geometric spectral methods case, the kinetic part is not necessarily fast-forwardable. Hence the simulation will necessarily grow with the cutoff max ν Nν.For the block-encoding analysis, define δν as the factorwise near-isometry defect: 

A†

> ν

Aν − I ≤ δν.If the above is satisfied, we say that Aν is a δν-approximate isometry. It follows only that ∥A ν∥ ≤ √1 + δν; hence any supplied block encoding may use a normalization αA,ν ≤ √1 + δν. The near-isometry estimate controls the possible normalization but does not construct a circuit. Ac-cordingly, the block-encoding statements below assume coherent controlled implementations of 

Aν/αA,ν and its adjoint, to the required arithmetic precision, with αA,ν ≤ √1 + δν. Their gate and oracle costs remain explicit implementation assumptions. 

Proposition 4.11 (Block encodings of the sandwiched operators) . Suppose the implemented padded raw block B pad  

> ν,N

from (299) has an exact controlled block encoding with normalization αpad  

> B,ν

, and that the exact potential-value access supplies a block encoding of M ⊕  

> f,N

/Λ f . Assume also the controlled block encodings of every Aν/αA,ν and its adjoint described above. The sandwiched kinetic and potential operators admit block encodings with normalizations 

αK :=

> m

# ∑

> ν=1

α2

> A,ν

αpad  

> B,ν

, α f := Λ fm

# ∏

> ν=1

α2

> A,ν

. (306) 82 The factor-ν kinetic sandwich uses one call each to the encodings of Aν, A†

> ν

, and B pad  

> ν,N

. The potential sandwich uses one potential-oracle block encoding and one call to each factor encoding and its adjoint. Standard LCU then gives a block encoding of H src  

> R,N

(t) with normalization 

αH (t) = |a(t)| αK + |b(t)| α f .

If δsamp ≤ 1 and αpad  

> B,ν

≤ αpad  

> B,0

(N, Npad ) uniformly in ν, then 

αK ≤ (m + 1)αpad  

> B,0

(N, Npad ), α f ≤ eΛ f . (307) 

In particular, if the raw padded kinetic encoding has αpad  

> B,0

= O(N2pad ) and N pad ≤ 7N, then αK =

O(mN 2) while α f = O(Λ f ).Proof. The block-encoding product lemma gives each sandwich normalization, and factor selec-tion followed by LCU gives αK and αH (t). Finally, α2 

> A,ν

≤ 1 + δν and 1 + x ≤ ex give 

> m

# ∑

> ν=1

α2 

> A,ν

≤ m + δsamp ,

> m

# ∏

> ν=1

α2 

> A,ν

≤ eδsamp ,which proves the stated bounds. For constant factor-chart counts and uniform resolution, the chart and grid registers use 

O

> m

# ∑

> ν=1

[log |I ν| + pν log N]

!

= O(d log N) (308) qubits. The formal product grid contains NΘ(d) nodes, as expected for a full wavefunction dis-cretization. Under the explicit block-encoding and oracle-access assumptions above, the algorithm need not materialize an Nd × Nd resampling matrix or loop over all product nodes: it applies m

constant-dimensional resampling and kinetic primitives coherently to the factor registers. This conclusion depends on those access assumptions and does not follow from register factorization alone. The same formal construction applies beyond product manifolds, but a global interpolation may then be inefficient. Showing a complete polynomial gate complexity still hinges on the effi-ciency of block encoding A, as even those each component manifold is constant dimensional, the number of global interpolation functions and grid points may grow with d. Still, we make a stride in this direction by analyzing a setting where the discretization parameter Nν can be taken to be poly (m).

4.2.2 Discretization error analysis for products of constant dimensional manifolds 

The digital coherent-chart error on the product manifold (286) is analyzed by comparing the exact and fully discrete evolutions in four stages: projection onto the source space, approximation of the geometric coefficients, approximation on the local grids, and comparison with the final discrete operator. Duhamel’s formula then combines the four errors together. The main result, Theorem 4.23, assumes that the dimensions, numbers of charts, chart distor-tions, and the metric, density, cutoff, and IMS quantities of the factors are bounded independently 83 of the factor and of d. It also assumes that one common source resolution can be chosen for all factors, at least as large as N divided by a polynomial in d. Along this choice, the source-space projection error defined in (315) and the error from representing a source-space function on a local grid defined in (388) must decay at the rates stated in the theorem. Finally, the derivatives of the geometric coefficients and the Sobolev norms used in the later estimates are allowed to grow with 

d, but by no more than (Cd β)d; their precise definitions appear in (345), (420), and Theorem 4.23. Under these assumptions, each of the four errors is at most (Cd β/N)d. Thus a resolution poly-nomial in d suffices for fixed target accuracy. No particular construction of the source spaces is required. For clarity, use common resolutions Rν = R and Nν = N for every factor. Accordingly, write 

Vsrc  

> R

, Qsrc  

> R

, ER, Ksrc  

> R,N

, Msrc   

> f,R,N

, and Hsrc  

> R,N

for the objects previously defined with R = ( R, . . . , R) and 

N = ( N, . . . , N).The local Fourier construction does not prescribe the global source spaces, so their projection errors are retained explicitly below. We use the following notation for the factorwise Sobolev norms. If X is a Hilbert space, then v ∈ Hs(Mν; X ) means that xν 7 → v(xν) is X -valued and its weak derivatives in xν through order s are square integrable in the X norm. The operator Qν,Rν

acts only on xν and as the identity on X . Here one takes X = Hr (M−ν) when estimating the above mixed global Hr error, where M−ν := ∏μ̸ =ν Mμ. We also use the shorthand Hsxν (Hr

> −ν

) :=

Hs(Mν; Hr (M−ν)) . Associated with this space is the following (mixed-order) Sobolev norm 

∥v∥2   

> Hsxν(Hr
> −ν)

:=

> s

# ∑

> j=0
> r

# ∑

> ℓ=0

Z

> M

|∇ ℓ 

> x−ν

∇jxν v(x)|2    

> [g−1
> −ν]⊗ℓ⊗[g−1
> ν]⊗j

dvol g(x), (309) where ∇ is the covariant derivative and g−ν = L  

> j̸=ν

gj. Also recall the manifold Sobolev norm (250): 

∥v∥2  

> Hrg(M)

:=

> r

# ∑

> m=0

Z

> M

|∇ mv(x)|2 

> [g−1]⊗m

d vol g(x). (310) In addition to source interpolation, the digital method incurs aliasing from the local DFTs. The analysis separates four contributions: source projection, Jackson smoothing of the continuum ki-netic operator, local Fourier discretization, and removal of Jackson smoothing from the discrete operator. For the exact evolution u(t) and the discrete evolution uR,N (t), the resulting decompo-sition is 

∥u(t) − uR,N (t)∥ ≤ ∥ u(t) − uR(t)∥ (src interp.) 

+ ∥uR(t) − uR,J (t)∥ (smoothed – cont.) 

+ ∥uR,J (t) − uR,J,N (t)∥ (local Fourier) 

+ ∥uR,J,N (t) − uR,N (t)∥. (smoothed – disc.) The assumption is that uR,N (0) = uR,J,N (0) = uR(0) = u(0) = u0 ∈ Vsrc  

> R

. The rest of the section is divided in results that analyze each of these error. The end then recombines them to provide the main result. 

Source Interpolation Error For r ∈ { 0, 2 }, define 

Sν,r (Rν) := ∥Qν,Rν ⊗ I−ν∥Hrg (M)→Hrg (M) , (311) 84 and 

Sacc  

> ν,r

(R) := ∏

> μ<ν

Sμ,r (Rμ), Ssrc, r(R) := max  

> 1≤ν≤m

Sacc  

> ν,r

(R), (312) where the empty product equals one. 

Lemma 4.12 (Product source-projection error) . For every v ∈ Hrg(M) and r ∈ { 0, 2 },

∥(I − Qsrc  

> R

)v∥Hrg ≤

> m

# ∑

> ν=1

Sacc  

> ν,r

(R) I − (Qν,Rν ⊗ I−ν)v Hrg

≤ Ssrc, r(R)

> m

# ∑

> ν=1

I − (Qν,Rν ⊗ I−ν)v Hrg

. (313) 

Proof. The identity 

I −

> m

O

> ν=1

Qν,Rν =

> m

# ∑

> ν=1

O

> μ<ν

Qμ,Rμ

!

(I − Qν,Rν ) O

> μ>ν

Iμ

!

(314) and the triangle inequality give the first bound. The second follows by maximizing the accumu-lated stability factor over ν.Since Qν,Rν is an L2(Mν)-orthogonal projector, Sν,0 (Rν) ≤ 1. Orthogonality in L2 does not imply H2 contractivity, so Sν,2 (Rν) is retained. If all factor projectors are contractive in Hrg, then 

Ssrc, r = 1. For r ∈ { 0, 2 }, define the stability-weighted sum of the one-factor projection errors by 

εsrc  

> r

(T, R) := Ssrc, r (R)

> m

# ∑

> ν=1

sup 

> 0≤t≤T

I − (Qν,R ⊗ I−ν)u(t) Hrg

, R = ( R, . . . , R). (315) Like in earlier sections define 

A1 :=

Z T

> 0

|a(t)| dt, B1 :=

Z T

> 0

|b(t)| dt. (316) The (src interp.) is controlled by (315). 

Lemma 4.13 (source interpolation error) .

sup 

> 0≤t≤T

∥u(t) − uR(t)∥ ≤ εsrc 0 (T, R) + A1

√dεsrc 2 (T, R) + B1Λ f εsrc 0 (T, R). (317) 

Proof. Define the source-projection residual and, for r = 0, 2, its error by 

eR(t) := ( I − Qsrc  

> R

)u(t), ϵsrc  

> r

(T, R) := sup 

> 0≤t≤T

∥eR(t)∥Hrg . (318) Let usrc  

> R

denote the source-projected trajectory, 

i∂tusrc  

> R

(t) = Qsrc  

> R

H(t)Qsrc  

> R

usrc  

> R

(t), usrc  

> R

(0) = Qsrc  

> R

u(0). (319) 85 Lemma 4.12 and (315) give 

ϵsrc  

> r

(T, R) ≤ εsrc  

> r

(T, R). (320) For the dynamical comparison, put 

θR(t) := Qsrc  

> R

u(t) − usrc  

> R

(t). (321) Since both source trajectories start from Qsrc  

> R

u(0), one has θR(0) = 0. Since Q = Qsrc  

> R

is time independent and u = Qu + eR, projection of the exact equation gives 

i∂t(Qu ) = QH (t)u = QH (t) Qu + eR



= QH (t)Q(Qu ) + QH (t)eR. (322) Subtracting (319) from (322) gives 

i∂tθR(t) = QH (t)QθR(t) + QH (t)eR(t). (323) Variation of constants therefore yields 

θR(t) = −i

Z t

> 0

Usrc  

> R

(t, s)QH (s)eR(s) ds. (324) The propagator is unitary and Q is an L2 contraction. Consequently, (324) gives 

∥θR(t)∥2 ≤

Z t

> 0

∥QH (s)eR(s)∥ ds

≤

Z t

> 0

|a(s)| −∆geR(s) + |b(s)| ∥ f e R(s)∥ ds. (325) For v ∈ H2 

> g

(M), the identity ∆gv = tr g(∇2v) and Cauchy–Schwarz for the metric trace give 

−∆gv ≤ √d ∥v∥H2 

> g

. (326) The kinetic estimate (326) and ∥ f v ∥ ≤ Λ f ∥v∥2 imply, pointwise in time, 

∥QH (s)eR(s)∥ ≤ | a(s)| √d ∥eR(s)∥H2 

> g

+ |b(s)| Λ f ∥eR(s)∥ . (327) Taking the defining suprema of the source errors outside the integral and using the definitions of 

A1 and B1 yields sup 

> 0≤t≤T

∥θR(t)∥2 ≤ √dA 1εsrc 2 (T, R) + B1Λ f εsrc 0 (T, R). (328) Using 

u(t) − usrc  

> R

(t) = eR(t) + θR(t), (329) and triangle inequality the result follows. 86 Errors from Jackson Smoothing – Kinetic The next estimates control the two Jackson smoothing terms (smoothed – cont.) and (smoothed – disc.). To match the notation of Section 3.2 m = nJ and replace the dimension d in (50) by the factor dimension pν. Thus, for z = ( z1, . . . , zpν ) ∈ Sν, define the factor kernel 

JnJ,pν (z) :=

> pν

# ∏

> j=1

JnJ (zj), κJ := κnJ = 2(nJ − 1), (330) where JnJ is the one-dimensional normalized kernel in (48)–(50). For nJ ≥ 2, let Sν,nJ denote the associated one-step Jackson–Fourier smoothing operator: 

(Sν,nJ g)( y) := ( JnJ,pν ∗Tpν g)( y) :=

Z

> Sν

JnJ,pν (z)g(y − z) dz, (331) where subtraction is modulo Zpν . In the notation of (51), Sν,nJ g is precisely gm after the substitu-tions m = nJ and d = pν.For an integer r ≥ 1, define the higher-order Jackson smoother 

J[r] 

> ν,nJ

:= I − (I − S ν,nJ )r,

J[r] 

> ν,nJ

g =

> r

# ∑

> j=1

(−1)j+1

rj



S j 

> ν,nJ

g. (332) Here I is the identity and S j 

> ν,nJ

denotes j-fold composition of the one-step smoother in (331). In particular, J[1] 

> ν,nJ

g = Sν,nJ g is exactly the smoother from Lemma 3.7. Here S = [ −1/2, 1/2 ]d denotes the common local coordinate box. 

Lemma 4.14 (High-order Jackson smoother) . Let q ≥ 0, r ≥ 1 and 0 ≤ ℓ ≤ r. If a scalar periodic function g belongs to W q+ℓ,∞(S), then 

g − J[r] 

> ν,nJ

g Wq,∞ ≤ 2r−ℓ

 cp0

nJ

ℓ

∥g∥Wq+ℓ,∞ , (333) 

where c p0 depends only on the factor-dimension bound. The approximation J[r] 

> ν,nJ

g is real when g is real and has coordinatewise Fourier bandwidth at most κJ. The same statements hold entrywise for matrix fields. Proof. The first-order input is exactly the Jackson-Fourier smoother from Lemma 3.7, applied in the factor dimension. More precisely, fix an integer s ≥ 0 and h ∈ Ws+1, ∞(Sν). Take d = pν, m =

nJ, and apply that lemma to the weak derivative f = ∂αh, where |α| ≤ s. Since ∂αh ∈ W1, ∞(Sν),Lip (∂αh) ≤ ∥∇ ∂αh∥L∞ ≤ √pν ∥h∥Ws+1, ∞ . (334) Lemma 3.7 therefore gives 

(I − S ν,nJ )∂αh ∞ ≤ 3√pν

nJ

Lip (∂αh)

≤ 3pν

nJ

∥h∥Ws+1, ∞ . (335) 87 Periodic convolution commutes with weak derivatives, so 

∂α(I − S ν,nJ )h = ( I − S ν,nJ )∂αh. (336) Taking the maximum over |α| ≤ s proves the first-order Sobolev estimate 

(I − S ν,nJ )h Ws,∞ ≤ cp0

nJ

∥h∥Ws+1, ∞ , cp0 := 3p0, (337) under the componentwise maximum convention for Ws,∞.Set Tν,nJ := I − S ν,nJ . Iterating (337), with the Sobolev order raised by one at each step, gives 

Tℓ 

> ν,nJ

g Wq,∞ ≤ cp0

nJ

Tℓ−1 

> ν,nJ

g Wq+1, ∞ ≤ · · · ≤

 cp0

nJ

ℓ

∥g∥Wq+ℓ,∞ . (338) On the other hand, positivity and unit mass of the Jackson kernel imply 

Sν,nJ g Ws,∞ ≤ ∥ g∥Ws,∞ , Tν,nJ g Ws,∞ ≤ 2 ∥g∥Ws,∞ (339) for every integer s ≥ 0. Since 

g − J[r] 

> ν,nJ

g = Tr 

> ν,nJ

g = Tr−ℓ 

> ν,nJ

Tℓ 

> ν,nJ

g, (340) combining (338) with (339) yields (333). It remains to verify the structural claims. By Lemma 3.7, the one-step operator Sν,nJ is the real Fourier multiplier with symbol bJnJ,pν (k), and this symbol vanishes for ∥k∥∞ > κJ. The multiplier of I − (I − S ν,nJ )r is therefore 1 −



1 − bJnJ,pν (k)

r

, (341) which vanishes whenever bJnJ,pν (k) = 0. Hence the iterated approximation has Fourier support contained in that of the original Jackson kernel. Finally, the kernel is real and the iterated ap-proximation is a real polynomial in its convolution operator, so it preserves real-valuedness. All arguments apply entrywise to matrix fields. For a factor chart a, abbreviate 

h(ν) 

> a

:= ( ρ(ν) 

> a

)−1/2 , C(ν),ij a := ρ(ν) 

> a

(gν)ij a , W(ν) 

> a

:= Wν ◦ (κ(ν) 

> a

)−1,Apply the operator J[d+2] 

> ν,nJ

entrywise, and set 

h(ν) 

> a,J

:= J[d+2] 

> ν,nJ

h(ν) 

> a

, C(ν),ij a,J := J[d+2] 

> ν,nJ

C(ν),ij a , W(ν) 

> a,J

:= J[d+2] 

> ν,nJ

W(ν) 

> a

.Define the IMS-inclusive factor operators 

K⊕ 

> ν

:= M

> a∈I ν

"

Mh(ν)

> a
> pν

# ∑

> i,j=1

∂† 

> i

MC(ν),ij a

∂j Mh(ν)

> a

− MW(ν)

> a

#

, (342) 

K⊕ 

> ν,J

:= M

> a∈I ν

"

Mh(ν)

> a,J
> pν

# ∑

> i,j=1

∂† 

> i

MC(ν),ij a,J 

∂j Mh(ν)

> a,J

− MW(ν)

> a,J

#

. (343) 88 For every grid size L, define the Jackson-smoothed chart matrix 

BJ 

> a,L

:= Mh(ν)

> a,J
> pν

# ∑

> i,j=1

(D(ν)

> a,L,i

)† MC(ν),ij a,J 

D(ν) 

> a,L,j

Mh(ν)

> a,J

− MW(ν)

> a,J

. (344) All coefficient multipliers in these formulas use the fixed periodic extensions introduced in the continuum construction (Section 4). For every integer r ≥ 0, define the factorwise bound on the geometric quantities associated with each component manifold: 

Gν,r := max 

> a∈I ν

max 



h(ν)    

> aWr,∞(Sν)

, max 

> 1≤i,j≤pν

C(ν),ij a Wr,∞ (Sν ) , W(ν)   

> aWr,∞(Sν)



. (345) In particular, Gν,d+2 contains exactly the coefficient norms needed when the order-(d + 2) iterated Jackson operator is applied below. Let Bν,Rν operator be an idealized version of Aν that includes global interpolation but does not utilize a grid: 

(Bν,Rν c)a(y) := ρ(ν) 

> a

(y)1/2 χ(ν) 

> a

(( κ(ν) 

> a

)−1(y))( Eν,Rν c)(( κ(ν) 

> a

)−1(y)) .. (346) The first comparison concerns the globally-interpolated kinetic operators with raw and Jackson-smoothed coefficients: 

Kcont  

> ν

= B† 

> ν,Rν

K⊕ 

> ν

Bν,Rν , (347) and 

Kcont  

> ν,J

= B† 

> ν,Rν

K⊕

> ν,J

Bν,Rν , (348) respectively. Conversion between H2

> ν,⊕

(L2(M−ν)) and H2 

> xν

(L2(M−ν)) norms is controlled by the factor lo-calization norm. Set 

Hsrc  

> −ν,R

:= O 

> μ̸=ν

Hsrc 

> μ,R

, E−ν,R := O 

> μ̸=ν

Eμ,R : Hsrc  

> −ν,R

→ L2(M−ν), (349) and define 

Cgeom   

> T,ν,2

:= ∥T ν∥L(H2    

> xν(L2(M−ν)) ,H2
> ν,⊕)

. (350) Put 

ϑ(ν) 

> a

(y) := ρ(ν) 

> a

(y)1/2 χ(ν) 

> a

(( κ(ν) 

> a

)−1(y)) , (351) and let Cκ,a,2 (gν) denote (265) with (ℓ, d, g) = ( a, pν, gν). The continuum localization calculation (282), specialized to s = 2 and d = pν, gives 

Cgeom   

> T,ν,2

≤ Lpν,2 

"

# ∑

> a∈I ν



ϑ(ν)  

> aW2, ∞

Cκ,a,2 (gν)

2

#1/2 

. (352) 89 Since E−ν,R is an isometry and Bν,R = TνEν,R, every c ∈ H src  

> R

satisfies 

(Bν,R ⊗ IHsrc  

> −ν,R

)c H2  

> ν,⊕(Hsrc
> −ν,R)

= (Tν ⊗ IL2(M−ν ))ERc H2  

> ν,⊕(L2(M−ν))

≤ Cgeom   

> T,ν,2

∥ERc∥H2   

> xν(L2(M−ν))

. (353) In the preceding notation, H2 

> xν

(L2(M−ν)) = H2 

> xν

(H0

> −ν

).All factor operators and maps in the following lemmas are tensored with the identity on Hsrc 

> −ν,R

;this identity factor is from the notation. The scalar factor estimates extend with the same constants: expand in an orthonormal basis of Hsrc 

> −ν,R

, apply the scalar estimate componentwise, and sum by Parseval and Minkowski. 

Lemma 4.15 (Continuum Jackson smoothing error) . Let CJ 

> p0

:= 4 + 3p0 + 94 p20, nJ ≥ max 



2, cp0



CJ 

> p0

Gν,d+2

1/ d

.

Then c ∈ H src  

> R

satisfies 

(Kcont  

> ν

− Kcont  

> ν,J

)c 2 ≤ Cgeom   

> T,ν,2

Ac,J

 cp0

nJ

d

Gν,d+2 ∥ERc∥H2   

> xν(L2(M−ν))

., (354) 

where A c,J =  1 + 6p20

2(Gν,2 + 1)( Gν,1 + 1) + ( Gν,2 + 1)2 (4 + 3p0 + 94 p20).Proof. The map Bν,R = TνEν,R is an L2 isometry. Hence its adjoint is an L2 contraction, and 

(Kcont  

> ν

− Kcont  

> ν,J

)c 2

= B†

> ν,R

(K⊕ 

> ν

− K ⊕

> ν,J

)Bν,Rc 2

≤ εJ 

> K,ν

∥B ν,Rc∥H2 

> ν,⊕

≤ Cgeom   

> T,ν,2

εJ 

> K,ν

∥ERc∥X 2 

> ν

,where the suppressed identity factors are understood and 

εJ 

> K,ν

:= K⊕ 

> ν

− K ⊕  

> ν,J H2
> ν,⊕→L2
> ν,⊕

. (355) The second inequality is (353). The estimate of εJ 

> K,ν

follows the local-operator argument in the proof of Theorem 4.9. Define the coefficient envelopes 

Henv  

> ν,2

:= max 

> a∈I ν

max 

n

h(ν)  

> aW2, ∞

, h(ν) 

> a,J W2, ∞

o

,

Cenv  

> ν,1

:= max 

> a∈I ν

max 

> 1≤i,j≤pν

max 

n

C(ν),ij a W1, ∞ , C(ν),ij a,J W1, ∞

o

. (356) For scalar functions ηL, ηR and a matrix field A = ( Aij ), put 

T (ν) 

> a

[ηL, A, ηR] := MηL

> pν

# ∑

> i,j=1

∂† 

> i

MAij ∂j MηR . (357) 90 The same six-term product-rule expansion as in (272) gives, for u ∈ H2(Sν),

T (ν) 

> a

[ηL, A, ηR]u 2 ≤ 6p2 

> ν

∥ηL∥∞



max  

> i,j

Aij 

> W1, ∞



∥ηR∥W2, ∞ ∥u∥H2 . (358) Indeed, after writing ∂† 

> i

= −∂i, each (i, j) summand contains two terms involving a derivative of 

Aij and four involving Aij itself; the factors multiplying u, ∂iu, ∂ju, or ∂i∂ju are bounded by the three coefficient norms displayed above. Summing the six terms and the p2 

> ν

index pairs proves (358). For one chart, the kinetic difference has the exact telescoping expansion 

T (ν) 

> a

[h(ν) 

> a

, C(ν) 

> a

, h(ν) 

> a

] − T (ν) 

> a

[h(ν) 

> a,J

, C(ν) 

> a,J

, h(ν) 

> a,J

]= T (ν) 

> a

[h(ν) 

> a

− h(ν) 

> a,J

, C(ν) 

> a

, h(ν) 

> a

]+ T (ν) 

> a

[h(ν) 

> a,J

, C(ν) 

> a

− C(ν) 

> a,J

, h(ν) 

> a

]+ T (ν) 

> a

[h(ν) 

> a,J

, C(ν) 

> a,J

, h(ν) 

> a

− h(ν) 

> a,J

]. (359) Applying (358) to these three terms and bounding the IMS multiplier difference directly gives 

εJ 

> K,ν

≤ 6p2

> ν

2Henv  

> ν,2

Cenv  

> ν,1

max 

> a∈I ν

h(ν) 

> a

− h(ν)  

> a,J W2, ∞

+ ( Henv  

> ν,2

)2 max 

> a∈I ν
> 1≤i,j≤pν

C(ν),ij a − C(ν),ij a,J W1, ∞



+ max 

> a∈I ν

W(ν) 

> a

− W(ν)  

> a,J ∞

. (360) Define 

∆ν,J := max 

> a∈I ν

h

h(ν) 

> a

− h(ν)  

> a,J W2, ∞

+ max  

> i,j

C(ν),ij a − C(ν),ij a,J W1, ∞

+ W(ν) 

> a

− W(ν) 

> a,J ∞

i

, (361) then 

εJ 

> K,ν

≤  1 + 6p2

> ν

2Henv  

> ν,2

Cenv  

> ν,1

+ ( Henv  

> ν,2

)2 ∆ν,J .Let ξJ = cp0 

> nJ

. Using r = d + 2 in (333), with (q, ℓ) = ( 2, d) for h, (q, ℓ) = ( 1, d + 1) for C, and 

(q, ℓ) = ( 0, d + 2) for W, yields max 

> a∈I ν

h(ν) 

> a

− h(ν)  

> a,J W2, ∞

≤ 4ξd 

> J

Gν,d+2,max 

> a∈I ν
> 1≤i,j≤pν

C(ν),ij a − C(ν),ij a,J W1, ∞ ≤ 2ξd+1J Gν,d+2,max 

> a∈I ν

W(ν) 

> a

− W(ν)  

> a,J ∞

≤ ξd+2J Gν,d+2, (362) where (345) was used. Consequently, 

∆ν,J ≤ (4 + 2ξJ + ξ2J )ξd 

> J

Gν,d+2. (363) 91 Since nJ ≥ 2, ξJ ≤ cp0 /2; using cp0 = 3p0 gives 

∆ν,J ≤ (4 + 3p0 + 94 p20)

 cp0

nJ

d

Gν,d+2. (364) The Henv  

> ν,2

and Cenv  

> ν,1

themselves can be bounded in terms of the non-smoothed versions plus error 

∆ν,J :

Henv  

> ν,2

≤ G ν,2 + ∆ν,J , Cenv  

> ν,1

≤ G ν,1 + ∆ν,J . (365) For example, once ∆ν,J ≤ 1 (which is satisfied by the lemma’s asymptotic condition on nJ ), one has a bound that depends only on the non-smoothed versions: 1 + 6p2

> ν

2Henv  

> ν,2

Cenv  

> ν,1

+ ( Henv  

> ν,2

)2 ≤ 1 + 6p20

2(Gν,2 + 1)( Gν,1 + 1) + ( Gν,2 + 1)2 . (366) The discrete analogue compares the source-space operators with raw and Jackson-smoothed padded chart blocks: 

Ksrc  

> ν,R,N

= A∗ 

> ν

Bpad  

> ν,N

Aν, (367) and 

Ksrc, J 

> ν,R,N

= A∗ 

> ν

BJ,pad  

> ν,N

Aν. (368) 

Lemma 4.16 (Source-space Jackson smoothing error) . Suppose Aν is a δν-approximate isometry and nJ satisfies the explicit condition in Lemma 4.15. Then every c ∈ H src  

> R

satisfies 

(Ksrc,J  

> ν,R,N

− Ksrc  

> ν,R,N

)c 2 ≤ (1 + δν)Ad,J

 cp0

nJ

d+2

Gν,d+2 ∥c∥2 , (369) 

where Ad,J := 3 1 + 3p20(2πNpad )2



1 + max  

> 1≤μ≤m

Gμ,0 

2!

. (370) 

Proof. The definitions of the two source matrices give 

(Ksrc,J  

> ν,R,N

− Ksrc  

> ν,R,N

)c 2

= A†

> ν

(BJ,pad  

> ν,N

− Bpad  

> ν,N

)Aνc 2

≤ ∥A ν∥2 εJ,grid  

> K,ν

∥c∥2 ,where εJ,grid  

> K,ν

:= ∥BJ,pad  

> ν,N

− Bpad  

> ν,N

∥2→2.The δν-approximate isometry property gives ∥A ν∥2 ≤ 1 + δν. Define the bounds 

Henv  

> ν,0

:= max 

> a∈I ν

max 

n

h(ν)  

> a∞

, h(ν) 

> a,J ∞

o

,

Cenv  

> ν,0

:= max 

> a∈I ν

max 

> 1≤i,j≤pν

max 

n

C(ν),ij a ∞ , C(ν),ij a,J ∞

o

. (371) 92 For scalar grid functions ηL, ηR and a matrix-valued grid function A = ( Aij ), define the single-grid discrete trilinear block 

fT (ν) 

> a,L

[ηL, A, ηR] := MηL

> pν

# ∑

> i,j=1

(D(ν)

> a,L,i

)† MAij D(ν) 

> a,L,j

MηR . (372) Exact diagonal evaluation satisfies ∥Mc∥2→2 ≤ ∥ c∥∞, and 

D(ν)  

> a,L,i2→2

≤ 2πL. (373) Hence submultiplicativity gives 

fT (ν) 

> a,L

[ηL, A, ηR] 2→2 ≤ p2

> ν

(2πL)2 ∥ηL∥∞



max  

> i,j

Aij 

> ∞



∥ηR∥∞ . (374) For one chart, the difference between the kinetic parts of the raw and Jackson cores has the exact telescoping expansion 

fT (ν) 

> a,L

[h(ν) 

> a

, C(ν) 

> a

, h(ν) 

> a

] − fT (ν) 

> a,L

[h(ν) 

> a,J

, C(ν) 

> a,J

, h(ν) 

> a,J

]= fT (ν) 

> a,L

[h(ν) 

> a

− h(ν) 

> a,J

, C(ν) 

> a

, h(ν) 

> a

]+ fT (ν) 

> a,L

[h(ν) 

> a,J

, C(ν) 

> a

− C(ν) 

> a,J

, h(ν) 

> a

]+ fT (ν) 

> a,L

[h(ν) 

> a,J

, C(ν) 

> a,J

, h(ν) 

> a

− h(ν) 

> a,J

]. (375) The IMS branches differ by −MW(ν) 

> a−W(ν)
> a,J

. Applying (374) to the three terms above and taking the maximum over charts yields max 

> a∈I ν

Ba,L − BJ  

> a,L2→2

≤ p2

> ν

(2πL)2

"

2Henv  

> ν,0

Cenv  

> ν,0

max 

> a∈I ν

h(ν) 

> a

− h(ν) 

> a,J ∞

+ ( Henv  

> ν,0

)2 max 

> a∈I ν
> 1≤i,j≤pν

C(ν),ij a − C(ν),ij a,J ∞

#

+ max 

> a∈I ν

W(ν) 

> a

− W(ν)  

> a,J ∞

. (376) Define 

∆(0) 

> ν,J

:= max 

> a∈I ν

h

h(ν) 

> a

− h(ν)  

> a,J ∞

+ max  

> i,j

C(ν),ij a − C(ν),ij a,J ∞ + W(ν) 

> a

− W(ν) 

> a,J ∞

i

. (377) Consequently, max 

> a∈I ν

Ba,L − BJ  

> a,L2→2

≤  1 + p2

> ν

(2πL)2 2Henv  

> ν,0

Cenv  

> ν,0

+ ( Henv  

> ν,0

)2 ∆(0) 

> ν,J

. (378) The bound on ∆(0) 

> ν,J

follows the proof of Lemma 4.15, using (q, ℓ) = ( 0, d + 2) for each of h, C,and W. Each of the three summands in (377) is at most ξd+2J Gν,d+2 (see proof of Lemma 4.15), so their sum contributes the factor three. Hence, 

∆(0) 

> ν,J

≤ 3

 cp0

nJ

d+2

Gν,d+2.93 Each of the three component maxima is bounded by ∆(0) 

> ν,J

.The smoothing defect ∆(0) 

> ν,J

also allows us to bound the smoothed coefficient envelopes in terms of the raw coefficients: 

Henv  

> ν,0

≤ G ν,0 + ∆(0) 

> ν,J

, Cenv  

> ν,0

≤ G ν,0 + ∆(0) 

> ν,J

. (379) Moreover, ∆(0) 

> ν,J

≤ ∆ν,J . Thus, if ∆ν,J ≤ 1, then ∆(0) 

> ν,J

≤ 1 as well. Taking L = Npad , the envelope bounds above imply 2Henv  

> ν,0

Cenv  

> ν,0

+  Henv 

> ν,0

2 ≤ 3(Gν,0 + 1)2.Combining this estimate with (384) and the bound on ∆(0) 

> ν,J

gives 

εJ,grid  

> K,ν

≤ Ad,J

 cp0

nJ

d+2

Gν,d+2.Finally, ∥A ν∥2 ≤ 1 + δν proves (369). No Jackson smoothing of the potential is required. It remains to bound the local Fourier con-tribution in (local Fourier). 

Local Fourier Error – Kinetic The local Fourier error is the difference between the Jackson-smoothed operators in (348) and (368). An intermediate Galerkin operator, analogous to that of Section 4.1, isolates this error from aliasing. Let F(ν) 

> a,Nν

denote the unitary DFT on the factor grid. The version of Aν without aliasing is the following 

AG 

> ν

c := M

> a∈I ν

(F(ν) 

> a,Nν

)† \(Bν,Rν c)a(k)



> k∈B ν,Nν

. (380) Aliasing is avoided because b· denotes an exact computation of the Fourier coefficients. This allows us to define an analogous version of the Galerkin kinetic operator from the previous Section 4.1 but with the source interpolation: For each factor chart, let 

P(ν) 

> a,N

: L2(Tpν ) −→ span 

n

e2πik ·y : k ∈ B ν,N

o

(381) be the orthogonal Fourier projector, and set P⊕ 

> ν,N

:= L 

> a∈I ν

P(ν) 

> a,N

. This digital projector retains exactly (2N)pν modes and is distinct from the symmetric continuum projector PN used in Theo-rem 4.9. 

KG 

> ν,Rν,Nν

:= ( AG 

> ν

)† BG 

> ν,Nν

AG 

> ν

, (382) where BG 

> ν,N

:= P⊕ 

> ν,N

K⊕ 

> ν,J

P⊕ 

> ν,N

.Jackson smoothing permits the factorwise de-aliasing argument of Section 3.2. With sufficient padding, the Jackson-smoothed padded block BJ,pad  

> ν,N

equals the exact Jackson Galerkin block BG 

> ν,N

.94 Use the zero-padding isometries Z(ν) 

> a

already defined in (298). Relative to the retained grid, the sampled diagonal matrices and differentiation matrices in the raw chart block are evaluated on the Npad grid. Now the additional Jackson-smoothed padded discrete kinetic operator by 

BJ,pad  

> ν,N

:= M

> a∈I ν

(Z(ν) 

> a

)† BJ 

> a,Npad

Z(ν) 

> a

. (383) Because Z(ν) 

> a

is an isometry and its adjoint is a contraction, 

Bpad  

> ν,N

− BJ,pad   

> ν,N2→2

≤ max 

> a∈I ν

Ba,Npad − BJ  

> a,Npad 2→2

. (384) Hence Lemma 4.16 also work with for the padded operators by replacing N with Npad .The following shows that for sufficient padding the aliasing error is zero. 

Proposition 4.17. If Npad ≥ N + 3κJ, (385) 

then BJ,pad  

> ν,N

= BG 

> ν,N

. (386) When nJ = N, one has κJ = 2(N − 1), so the condition above becomes Npad ≥ N + 6(N − 1).

Proof. An input in the truncated Fourier space has support in [−N, N − 1]pν . Reading the kinetic product from right to left, the two h multipliers and the Cij multiplier enlarge the final kinetic support to 

[−N − 3κJ, N − 1 + 3κJ]pν ; (387) the intermediate supports use one and two copies of κJ in the same way. Fourier differentiation does not enlarge support, and the IMS branch lies in [−N − κJ, N − 1 + κJ]pν . The padded retained set is [−Npad , Npad − 1]pν , so both endpoints fit under exactly the same condition (385), no inter-mediate crosses the padded frequency boundary. Circular convolution on the padded grid thus equals ordinary Fourier convolution at every multiplication. The final adjoint zero-padding map performs the left Galerkin projection, proving (386). Thus padding changes the result in Lemma 4.16 through N → Npad ; in particular, the two differentiation matrices replace the factor N2 by N2pad . In particular, take nJ = N and the minimal padding L = Npad = N + 6(N − 1) ≤ 7N. The two differentiation matrices cost exactly the factor 

O(N2) that converts the coefficient approximation rate N−(d+2) into the required padded-matrix rate N−d.Padding removes coefficient-multiplication aliasing but not all aliasing in the method. The localization map T multiplies by a function of infinite bandwidth, and the source-space localiza-tion coefficients are themselves computed from grid samples. These effects are controlled jointly through the defect 

ηsrc  

> ν,r

(R, N) := sup 

> ∥c∥=1

(I − I⊕ 

> ν,N

)Bν,Rc Hr

> ν,⊕

, I⊕ 

> ν,N

:= M

> a∈I ν

I(ν) 

> a,N

, (388) 95 where Iν 

> a,N

is the Fourier interpolation operator for the a-th chart of the ν-th component manifold. For a continuous periodic function v : S → X , where S = [ −1/2, 1/2 ]pν and X is a Hilbert space, the Fourier interpolation operator is defined as follows: 

bvdisc  

> a,N

(k) := 1

(2N)pν ∑

> r∈G (ν)
> a,N

v(y(ν) 

> a,r

)e−2πik ·y(ν) 

> a,r

, k ∈ [−N, . . . , 0, . . . N − 1]pν , (389) 

(I(ν) 

> a,N

v)( y) := ∑

> k∈[−N,...,0,... N−1]pν

bvdisc  

> a,N

(k)e2πik ·y, y ∈ S. (390) Thus the coefficients indexed by Bν,N = [ −N, N − 1]pν are computed by the (2N)pν -point tensor-product DFT and define the corresponding Fourier polynomial. The following shows that a bound on ηsrc  

> ν,r

leads to a bound on δν (how close Aν is to an isome-try). 

Lemma 4.18. For the maps Aν and Bν,R defined in (295) and (346) , set 

δν := 2ηsrc  

> ν,0

+ ( ηsrc  

> ν,0

)2. (391) 

Then 

A†

> ν

Aν − I ≤ δν, δsamp :=

> m

# ∑

> ν=1

δν. (392) 

Proof. For qc := Bν,Rc, the normalized samples in Aνc are the grid values of I⊕ 

> ν,N

qc. Discrete Par-seval therefore gives ∥A νc∥2 = I⊕ 

> ν,N

qc L2

> ⊕

, while continuum localization gives ∥qc∥L2 

> ⊕

= ∥c∥2.Hence 

∥A νc∥22 − ∥ c∥22 ≤ I⊕ 

> ν,N

qc − qc L2

> ⊕



2 ∥qc∥L2 

> ⊕

+ I⊕ 

> ν,N

qc − qc L2

> ⊕



≤ δν ∥c∥22 . (393) Taking the supremum over unit c proves the claim. Expanding the product of the factor maps gives 

A†A − I ≤

> m

# ∏

> ν=1

(1 + δν) − 1≤ e∑m  

> ν=1δν

− 1 = eδsamp − 1, (394) 

Lemma 4.19 (Fourier consistency of the Jackson comparator) . Suppose the padding condition (385) is used. Then every c ∈ H src  

> R

satisfies 

(Kcont  

> ν,J

− Ksrc,J  

> ν,R,N

)c 2

≤ AFourier, J

h

3Cgeom   

> T,ν,2

ηsrc  

> ν,0

∥ERc∥H2   

> xν(L2(M−ν))

+



1 + 2p1 + δν



ηsrc  

> ν,2

∥c∥2

i

, (395) 

where A Fourier, J := 6p2

> ν

(Henv  

> ν,2

)2Cenv  

> ν,1

+ max a∈I ν W(ν) 

> a,J ∞

.

96 Under the explicit condition on nJ in Lemma 4.15, one has ∆ν,J ≤ 1. Equations (365) and (361) therefore give Henv  

> ν,2

≤ G ν,2 + 1, Cenv  

> ν,1

≤ G ν,1 + 1, and max a W(ν)  

> a,J ∞

≤ G ν,0 + 1. 

Proof. Fix ν and abbreviate 

B := Bν,R, P := P⊕ 

> ν,N

, KJ := K⊕

> ν,J

. (396) Let 

Eν,N := ( I − P⊕ 

> ν,N

)Bν,R. (397) Under the unitary retained-Fourier/grid identification implicit in (380), the exact Galerkin com-pression can be written as 

KG 

> ν,R,N

= B† 

> ν,R

P⊕ 

> ν,N

K⊕ 

> ν,J

P⊕ 

> ν,N

Bν,R. (398) The identity 

K⊕ 

> ν,J

− P⊕ 

> ν,N

K⊕ 

> ν,J

P⊕ 

> ν,N

= ( I − P⊕ 

> ν,N

)K⊕ 

> ν,J

+ P⊕ 

> ν,N

K⊕

> ν,J

(I − P⊕ 

> ν,N

), (399) shows that the exact continuum and retained compressions satisfy the two-sided identity 

Kcont  

> ν,J

− KG 

> ν,R,N

= E† 

> ν,N

K⊕

> ν,J

Bν,R

+ ( P⊕ 

> ν,N

Bν,R)†K⊕

> ν,J

Eν,N . (400) This is exactly the factor-source specialization of the continuum two-sided Galerkin defect (268), with T replaced by Bν,R and the continuum generator replaced by K⊕

> ν,J

. The first summand is the “output Fourier tail”. The second is the “input Fourier tail”, on which the second-order operator acts. Because I⊕ 

> ν,N

Bν,Rc belongs to the retained Fourier space and Fourier projection is the best approximation in each Hr norm, 

∥Eν,N ∥Hsrc   

> ν,R→Hr
> ν,⊕

≤ ηsrc  

> ν,r

, r = 0, 2. (401) Applying (274)– (275) with d replaced by pν and with the Jackson coefficients, and then adding the IMS multiplier, gives 

K⊕   

> ν,J L(H2
> ν,⊕,L2
> ν,⊕)

≤6p2

> ν

(Henv  

> ν,2

)2Cenv  

> ν,1

+ max 

> a∈I ν

W(ν)  

> a,J ∞

(402) The map B = TνEν,R is an L2 isometry, so ∥B c∥L2 

> ν,⊕

= ∥c∥2 and B† 

> L2
> ν,⊕→H src
> ν,R

= 1. Hence for the output tail part: 

E† 

> ν,N

K⊕

> ν,J

Bν,Rc 2 ≤



6p2

> ν

(Henv  

> ν,2

)2Cenv  

> ν,1

+ max 

> a∈I ν

W(ν) 

> a,J ∞



ηsrc  

> ν,0

∥B ν,Rc∥H2 

> ν,⊕

. (403) For the input tail, P⊕ 

> ν,N

Bν,R is an L2 contraction, while K⊕ 

> ν,J

acts directly on the tail. Hence the same operator norm (402) and the r = 2 estimate are required and give 

(P⊕ 

> ν,N

Bν,R)†K⊕

> ν,J

Eν,N c 2 ≤



6p2

> ν

(Henv  

> ν,2

)2Cenv  

> ν,1

+ max 

> a∈I ν

W(ν) 

> a,J ∞



ηsrc  

> ν,2

∥c∥2 . (404) Put 

Dν := AG 

> ν

− A ν.97 Adding and subtracting A† 

> ν

BG 

> ν,N

Aν gives 

KG 

> ν,R,N

− A † 

> ν

BJ,pad  

> ν,N

Aν = D† 

> ν

BG 

> ν,N

AG 

> ν

+ A† 

> ν

BG 

> ν,N

Dν

+ A†

> ν

(BG 

> ν,N

− BJ,pad  

> ν,N

)Aν. (405) The padding condition gives BJ,pad  

> ν,N

= BG 

> ν,N

exactly, using Proposition 4.17. Therefore the last line of (405) vanishes. After this cancellation, the remaining smoothed sampling error is 

KG 

> ν,R,N

− Ksrc,J  

> ν,R,N

= D† 

> ν

BG 

> ν,N

AG 

> ν

+ A† 

> ν

BG 

> ν,N

Dν (406) Note that Dνc is the padded version of (P⊕ 

> ν,N

− I⊕ 

> ν,N

)Bν,Rc. The triangle inequality and (401) therefore give 

AG 

> ν

− A ν Hsrc  

> ν,R→Hr
> ν,N,⊕

≤ 2ηsrc  

> ν,r

, r = 0, 2. (407) Note that BG 

> ν,N

is the padded version of P⊕ 

> ν,N

K⊕ 

> ν,J

P⊕ 

> ν,N

. Moreover, Fourier projection is contractive in H2, so 

AG 

> ν

c H2

> ν,N,⊕

= P⊕ 

> ν,N

Bν,Rc H2

> ν,⊕

≤ ∥B ν,Rc∥H2 

> ν,⊕

. (408) Using the r = 0 estimate in the first term of (406) gives 

D† 

> ν

BG 

> ν,N

AG 

> ν

c 2 ≤ 2



6p2

> ν

(Henv  

> ν,2

)2Cenv  

> ν,1

+ max 

> a∈I ν

W(ν) 

> a,J ∞



ηsrc  

> ν,0

∥B ν,Rc∥H2 

> ν,⊕

. (409) For the other term, Lemma 4.18 implies ∥A ν∥ ≤ √1 + δν. The r = 2 estimate in (407) therefore gives 

A† 

> ν

BG 

> ν,N

Dνc 2 ≤ 2p1 + δν



6p2

> ν

(Henv  

> ν,2

)2Cenv  

> ν,1

+ max 

> a∈I ν

W(ν) 

> a,J ∞



ηsrc  

> ν,2

∥c∥2 . (410) Adding (403), (404), (409), and (410) first gives the same bound with 3 ηsrc  

> ν,0

∥B ν,Rc∥H2 

> ν,⊕

. Applying (353) and then (402) proves (395). 

Local Fourier Error – Potential Lemma 4.20 (Product-grid interpolation) . Let v = ( va)a have periodic extensions in H d+2(Td) on every product chart. Define 

Vν,s(v)2 := ∑

> a

# ∑

> |α|≤ s

∂α 

> yν

va 

> 22

. (411) 

Then 

(I − I⊕ 

> N

)v H⊕ ≤



1 + 3d/2 pζ(d + 4)



m(d+2)/2 p(d + 2)!

Nd+2 max  

> 1≤ν≤m

Vν,d+2(v), (412) 

where ζ is the Riemann-zeta function. 

98 Proof. Set s = d + 2. Since s > d/2, weighted Cauchy–Schwarz makes the Fourier coefficients ab-solutely summable. The high-order truncation and multidimensional aliasing proofs of [Cha+26, Lemmas C.5–C.6] therefore apply chart by chart. Using the ℓ∞ norm for the cutoff and summing the squared estimates over product charts gives 

(I − I⊕ 

> N

)v H⊕ ≤ Cmd (d, s)

Ns

"

# ∑

> a

∥va∥2  

> Hs(Td)

#1/2 

, (413) with 

Cmd (d, s) := 1 +

 ∑ 

> z∈Zd\{ 0}

∥z∥−2s

> ∞



> 1/2

. (414) It remains only to convert the full Sobolev norm into the directional norms in the statement. For k = ( k1, . . . , km) grouped by factor, put bν(k) := 1 + 4π2 ∥kν∥22. Convexity and the binomial– multinomial formula give 

(1 + 4π2 ∥k∥22)s ≤ ms−1 m

# ∑

> ν=1

bν(k)s,

bν(k)s ≤ s! ∑

> |α|≤ s

(2π)2|α| |kαν |2 . (415) Multiplying by |bva(k)|2, summing over frequencies and product charts, and applying Parseval yields "

# ∑

> a

∥va∥2  

> Hs(Td)

#1/2 

≤ ms/2 √s! max  

> ν

Vν,s(v). (416) Combining (413) and (416) proves (412). Finally, the number of lattice points with ∥z∥∞ = r is at most 3 drd. At s = d + 2, 

# ∑ 

> z̸=0

∥z∥−2d−4 

> ∞

≤ 3d ∞

# ∑

> r=1

r−d−4 = 3dζ(d + 4). (417) Hence 

Cmd (d, d + 2) ≤ 1 + 3d/2 

q

ζ(d + 4).The error for the potential is a bound on the opertors without applying local Fourier interpo-lation to each f[ℓ], Qsrc  

> R

Mf Qsrc  

> R

and the result of applying Fourir interpolation ER Msrc   

> f,R,N

E † 

> R

. Specif-ically, for any path w : [0, T] → Vsrc  

> R

, define the potential discretization error by 

r f [w]( t) :=

h

Qsrc  

> R

Mf Qsrc  

> R

− ER Msrc   

> f,R,N

E †

> R

i

w(t),

ϵ f [w]( T) := sup 

> 0≤t≤T

r f [w]( t) 2 . (418) The following uses the previous interpolation bound to bound 99 Proposition 4.21 (Potential error from interpolation) . Let w : [0, T] → Vsrc  

> R

be a path such that, for every product chart a and t ∈ [0, T], the function y 7 −→ f (κ−1 

> a

(y))( T w(t)) a(y) (419) 

has a periodic extension in H d+2(Td). For derivatives in the factor coordinate y ν, define 

U f ,ν,r [w]( T) := sup 

> 0≤t≤T

"

# ∑

> a

# ∑

> |α|≤ r

∂α

> yν

h

f (κ−1 

> a

(·))( T w(t)) a

i 22

#1/2 

. (420) 

Set 

Cpot (d, m) :=



1 + 3d/2 

q

ζ(d + 4)



m(d+2)/2 

q

(d + 2)!, 

Ssrc −int := max  

> 1≤ν≤m

# ∏

> μ<ν

q

1 + δμ. (421) 

Then 

ϵ f [w]( T) ≤ Cpot (d, m)

Nd+2 max  

> 1≤ν≤m

U f ,ν,d+2[w]( T)+ Ssrc −int 

> m

# ∑

> ν=1

ηsrc 

> ν,0

! " 

Λ f sup 

> 0≤t≤T

∥w(t)∥2 + Cpot (d, m)

Nd+2 max  

> 1≤ν≤m

U f ,ν,d+2[w]( T)

#

, (422) 

where ηsrc  

> ν,0

is defined in (388) .Proof. Fix t ∈ [0, T] and a unit vector v ∈ Vsrc  

> R

. Since the interpolants agree with the localized functions at every grid point and A contains the normalized samples of T ER, discrete Parseval gives D

AE † 

> R

v, M⊕  

> f,N

AE † 

> R

w(t)

E

=

D

I⊕ 

> N

T v, I⊕ 

> N

M⊕ 

> f

T w(t)

E

> H⊕

. (423) Using M f = T † M⊕ 

> f

T and subtracting the right side of (423), we first obtain the two quantities that must be bounded: 

v, r f [w]( t)

=

D

T v, (I − I⊕ 

> N

)M⊕ 

> f

T w(t)

E

> H⊕

+

D

(I − I⊕ 

> N

)T v, I⊕ 

> N

M⊕ 

> f

T w(t)

E

> H⊕

. (424) For the first term, Lemma 4.20 applied to the function in (419) gives sup 

> 0≤t≤T

(I − I⊕ 

> N

)M⊕ 

> f

T w(t) H⊕

≤ Cpot (d, m)

Nd+2 max  

> 1≤ν≤m

U f ,ν,d+2[w]( T). (425) 100 Because T is an isometry and ∥v∥2 = 1, this is also an upper bound for the absolute value of the first inner product in (424). For the second term, write v = ERc. The identities T ER = N 

> ν

Bν,R and I⊕ 

> N

T ER = N

> ν

(I⊕ 

> ν,N

Bν,R)

give 

(I − I⊕ 

> N

)T ER

=

> m

# ∑

> ν=1

O

> μ<ν

I⊕ 

> μ,N

Bμ,R

!

⊗

h

(I − I⊕ 

> ν,N

)Bν,R

i

⊗ O

> μ>ν

Bμ,R

!

. (426) Each Bμ,R is an L2 isometry. Discrete Parseval and the δν-approximate isometry property give 

I⊕ 

> μ,N

Bμ,R 2→2 = Aμ 2→2 ≤

q

1 + δμ. (427) Using (388) in the middle factor of each summand yields 

(I − I⊕ 

> N

)T v H⊕ ≤

> m

# ∑

> ν=1

# ∏

> μ<ν

q

1 + δμ

!

ηsrc 

> ν,0

≤ Ssrc −int 

> m

# ∑

> ν=1

ηsrc 

> ν,0

. (428) The product in Ssrc −int contains only factors preceding ν because these factors use interpolated synthesis in (426); following factors use exact isometric synthesis. Finally, 

I⊕ 

> N

M⊕ 

> f

T w(t) H⊕

≤ Λ f ∥w(t)∥2 + (I − I⊕ 

> N

)M⊕ 

> f

T w(t) H⊕

. (429) Combining this estimate with the two bounds above, taking the supremum over unit v, and then taking the supremum over t proves (422). 

Combining All Errors Let a, b ∈ L1([ 0, T]; R), let f be real with ∥ f ∥∞ ≤ Λ f , and let u solve 

i∂tu = H(t)u with u(0) = u0 ∈ Vsrc  

> R

. Assume that the exact and comparison generators below are self-adjoint and generate unitary propagators, that all comparison evolutions start from u0, and that the source interpolation bound (317), the three consistency bounds (354), (395), and (369), and the potential bound (422) hold. Assume also that the Sobolev suprema displayed below are finite. Let uR solve 

i∂tuR(t) = Qsrc  

> R

H(t)Qsrc  

> R

uR(t), uR(0) = u0.On the source coefficient space set 

Kcont  

> R,J

:=

> m

# ∑

> ν=1

Kcont  

> ν,J

⊗ I−ν, Ksrc  

> R,J,N

:=

> m

# ∑

> ν=1

Ksrc, J 

> ν,R,N

⊗ I−ν,

Mcont   

> f,R

:= E † 

> R

Mf ER.Define uR,J := ERcR,J and uR,J,N := ERcR,J,N , where cR,J and cR,J,N are generated by 

a(t)Kcont  

> R,J

+ b(t)Mcont   

> f,R

, a(t)Ksrc  

> R,J,N

+ b(t)Msrc   

> f,R,N

,101 respectively, with initial coefficient vector E † 

> R

u0. Finally, let uR,N := ERcR,N , where cR,N is gener-ated by Hsrc  

> R,N

(t) with the same initial coefficient vector. The preceding estimates define the following error budgets. The source-interpolation budget is 

Esrc (T, R) := εsrc 0 (T, R) + A1

√d εsrc 2 (T, R) + B1Λ f εsrc 0 (T, R).and (317) states that sup 

> 0≤t≤T

∥u(t) − uR(t)∥2 ≤ Esrc (T, R). (430) The continuum Jackson-smoothing bound is 

EJ,cont (T, R) := A1

> m

# ∑

> ν=1

Cgeom   

> T,ν,2

Ac,J

 cp0

nJ

d

Gν,d+2 sup 

> 0≤t≤T

∥uR(t)∥H2   

> xν(L2(M−ν))

.Lemma 4.15 and Duhamel’s formula give sup 

> 0≤t≤T

∥uR(t) − uR,J (t)∥2 ≤ EJ,cont (T, R). (431) The kinetic part of the local Fourier bound is 

EF(T, R, N) := A1

> m

# ∑

> ν=1

AFourier, J

"

3Cgeom   

> T,ν,2

ηsrc  

> ν,0

sup 

> 0≤t≤T

∥uR,J (t)∥H2  

> xν(L2(M−ν))

+



1 + 2p1 + δν



ηsrc  

> ν,2

∥u0∥2

#

.The potential bound from Proposition 4.21 is 

E f (T, R, N) := Cpot (d, m)

Nd+2 max  

> 1≤ν≤m

U f ,ν,d+2[uR,J ]( T)+ Ssrc −int 

> m

# ∑

> ν=1

ηsrc 

> ν,0

! " 

Λ f ∥u0∥2 + Cpot (d, m)

Nd+2 max  

> 1≤ν≤m

U f ,ν,d+2[uR,J ]( T)

#

.Consequently, Lemma 4.19, Proposition 4.21, and Duhamel’s formula give sup 

> 0≤t≤T

∥uR,J (t) − uR,J,N (t)∥2 ≤ EF(T, R, N) + B1E f (T, R, N). (432) Finally, the discrete Jackson-smoothing bound is 

EJ,disc (T, R, N) := A1

> m

# ∑

> ν=1

(1 + δν)Ad,J

 cp0

nJ

d+2

Gν,d+2 ∥u0∥2 .Lemma 4.16 with Duhamel’s formula gives sup 

> 0≤t≤T

∥uR,J,N (t) − uR,N (t)∥2 ≤ EJ,disc (T, R, N). (433) 102 Proposition 4.22 (Dynamical discretization error) . Under the assumptions stated above, 

sup 

> 0≤t≤T

∥u(t) − uR,N (t)∥2 ≤ Esrc (T, R) + EJ,cont (T, R) + EF(T, R, N)+ B1E f (T, R, N) + EJ,disc (T, R, N). (434) 

Proof. The four evolutions satisfy 

u − uR,N = ( u − uR) + ( uR − uR,J )+ ( uR,J − uR,J,N ) + ( uR,J,N − uR,N ). (435) Combining (430), (431), (432), and (433) with (435) proves (434). 

Theorem 4.23 (Polynomial Cutoff for Discretized Coherent-Chart Methods) . Suppose M = ∏m 

> ν=1

Mν

has product metric g = Lm 

> ν=1

gν, with p ν := dim Mν ≤ p0 = O(1) and m ≤ d. Assume that the num-bers of factor charts, the chart distortions, and the metric, density, cutoff, and IMS data through order two are bounded uniformly in ν and d. Assume also that there are constants C R, κ1, κ2, cR, C∗, β∗, γR > 0,independent of d, N, and ν, such that, for every integer N ≥ C∗dβ∗ , there is an integer source resolution R(N), common to all factors, for which the following conditions hold. 1. The assumptions of Proposition 4.22 and of the four consistency results used there hold. In particular, the discrete evolution starts from the exact source state, and δsamp := ∑m 

> ν=1

δν ≤ 1.2. The chosen source resolution satisfies R (N) satisfies C R Nκ1 dκ2 ≥ R(N) ≥ cRd−γR N, and the source-projection errors with R (N) scaling this way obey 

εsrc  

> r

(T, R(N)) ≤ (C∗dβ∗ )d R(N)−(d+2−r), r ∈ { 0, 2 }.

Along the same resolution schedule, the source-to-grid errors separately satisfy 

ηsrc  

> ν,r

(R(N), N) ≤ (C∗dβ∗ )d N−(d+2−r), 1 ≤ ν ≤ m, r ∈ { 0, 2 }.

3. Each quantity in the following display is bounded by (C∗dβ∗ )d:A1, B1, Λ f , ∥u0∥2 , max  

> 1≤ν≤m

Gν,d+2,max  

> 1≤ν≤mv∈{ uR,uR,J}

sup 

> 0≤t≤T

∥v(t)∥H2   

> xν(L2(M−ν))

, max  

> 1≤ν≤m

U f ,ν,d+2[uR,J ]( T).

Then there are constants C 0 ≥ 1 and β ≥ 0, independent of d and N, such that every integer N ≥ C0dβ

satisfies 

sup 

> 0≤t≤T

∥u(t) − uR,N (t)∥2 ≤

 C0dβ

N

d

.

Consequently, for every ϵ ∈ (0, 1 ], it suffices to choose N =

l

C0dβϵ−1/ dm

to obtain error at most ϵ.

103 Proof. Choose the Jackson order nJ = N. Since its coefficient bandwidth is κJ = 2(N − 1), choose the minimal de-aliasing padding 

Npad = N + 3κJ = N + 6(N − 1) ≤ 7N.These choices satisfy the padding condition in Proposition 4.17 and do not change the asymptotic resolution. The uniform factor hypothesis and pν ≤ p0 imply sup 

> 1≤ν≤m

Cgeom   

> T,ν,2

= O(1).The low-order envelopes Gν,0 , Gν,1 , and Gν,2 are also uniformly bounded. Inspecting their defini-tions in the preceding consistency lemmas therefore gives sup 

> 1≤ν≤m

Ac,J = O(1), sup 

> 1≤ν≤m

AFourier, J = O(1).Finally, Npad ≤ 7N and the displayed formula for Ad,J give sup 

> 1≤ν≤m

Ad,J

N2 = O(1).These conclusions use only uniform low-order factor data. They do not control the high-order envelope Gν,d+2. They also do not control the comparison-evolution norms. Those quantities are assumed separately above. The lower bound on R(N) gives 

R(N)−d ≤ c−dR dγR d N−d.Therefore the two source terms of order R−d, as well as the faster R−(d+2) terms, are bounded by 

(C1dβ1 /N)d after enlarging constants independent of d and N. Hence Esrc (T, R) has this form. Since nJ = N, the continuum Jackson factor is N−d. The coefficient and regularity assumptions, together with the sum over at most m ≤ d factors, therefore give the same bound for EJ,cont (T, R).For the local Fourier term, ηsrc  

> ν,2

= O(N−d) and ηsrc  

> ν,0

= O(N−(d+2)). The factors 1 + 2√1 + δν are uniformly bounded because δν ≤ δsamp ≤ 1. Thus EF(T, R, N) is also bounded by (C2dβ2 /N)d.For the potential term, m ≤ d and the explicit expression for Cpot (d, m) imply Cpot (d, m) ≤

(Cd 2)d. Moreover, 

Ssrc −int = max  

> ν

# ∏

> μ<ν

q

1 + δμ ≤ exp 12

> m

# ∑

> μ=1

δμ

!

≤ e1/2 .The first part of E f (T, R, N) is proportional to N−(d+2), and its second part contains ∑ν ηsrc  

> ν,0

=

O(N−(d+2)). Both are therefore bounded by (C3dβ3 /N)d.Finally, Ad,J ≤ N2(C∗dβ∗ )d by assumption. Multiplying this by the discrete Jackson factor 

N−(d+2) gives N−d, so EJ,disc (T, R, N) has the same form. Absorbing the five factor sums, products of coefficient envelopes, and fixed constants into one polynomial base gives constants C0 and β

such that 

Esrc + EJ,cont + EF + B1E f + EJ,disc ≤

 C0dβ

N

d

.The result follows from Proposition 4.22; the displayed choice of N then makes the right-hand side at most ϵ.104 5 Applications 

5.1 Simulations of Physics 

The preceding sections develop quantum algorithms for Hamiltonians of the form ˆH(t) = −a(t)∆G + b(t)V, (436) acting on L2(M, d vol G ), where (M, G) is a Riemannian configuration space and V : M → R

is a real potential. Here, V corresponds to the potential f used in the preceding sections. In this section, we use G for the metric on the full physical configuration space and reserve g for the metric on the target space associated with a single site or link. This section explains why Hamiltonians of the form (436) arise naturally in physics. For a con-strained quantum-mechanical system, as discussed in Section 5.1.1, M is a curved configuration space. For a spatially discretized quantum field theory, it is often a Cartesian product M = T|Λ|

of copies of a fixed-dimensional target manifold T. The product metric makes the kinetic operator a sum of Laplace–Beltrami operators on the factors, while spatial-gradient, on-site, and plaquette terms contribute to the potential V.

5.1.1 Quantum Mechanics on Curved Spaces 

The most immediate case is the one that requires no construction at all. A single non-relativistic particle moving on a Riemannian manifold (M, G) under a potential V : M → R has the Hamil-tonian ˆH = − ¯h2

2m ∆G + V (x), x ∈ M , (437) acting on L2(M), where ∆G is the Laplace–Beltrami operator of G and m is the mass. This is already the form assumed in the beginning of this section, requiring neither a lattice regularization nor any field-theoretic input. It is also the template of which the remaining sections are instances: each arrives at (437) on a configuration space that is a Cartesian product, through its own choice of factor manifold, metric and potential. Such Hamiltonians arise whenever a mechanical system is subject to constraints, so that its configuration space is a curved manifold rather than a Euclidean space. The quantization of con-strained systems, and the operator-ordering question it raises, are discussed by DeWitt [DeW57]. Quantum systems governed by Hamiltonians of the form (437) arise in several concrete set-tings. These include particles constrained to prescribed geometries [Cos81b], with geometry-induced potentials in quantum nanostructures providing a prominent example [SBR17], as well as molecular Hamiltonians [Mey02] and shell-shaped atomic gases [TS24]. Treatments of the lat-ter two settings place particular emphasis on motion on the sphere S2. Moreover, manifolds with nontrivial topology may support topological terms, providing physically interesting toy models for more complicated systems. A particle on a circle with such a term has, for example, been studied as a target for quantum simulation in [She+22]. Although our present algorithm does not include topological terms, this example suggests a natural direction in which the framework could be extended. Quantum field theory on a curved spacetime is a different setting, since there the metric is a metric on spacetime rather than on the configuration space of the dynamical variables, and the 105 configuration space remains a space of field configurations. We therefore do not consider it in these notes. The models below may be field theories, but only on a flat Minkowski spacetime. 

5.1.2 Nonlinear Sigma Models 

Nonlinear sigma models (NLSMs) are an important prototypical class of models in physics. They were first introduced in [GL60] to describe pions and now play a broad role in both high-energy and condensed matter physics (see the review [Bur00] for a general introduction). A promi-nent particle-physics example is chiral perturbation theory, whose leading-order Lagrangian is that of a nonlinear sigma model with target manifold SU (Nf ) [Eck+89]. In condensed matter physics, the O(3) nonlinear sigma model, whose target manifold is S2, describes the low-energy behavior of Heisenberg antiferromagnets in one spatial dimension [Hal83] and two spatial dimen-sions [CHN89]. Reflecting this broad relevance, the O(N) models have also attracted considerable interest as targets for quantum simulation [SM05; Ale+19; SC19; Sin22]. Their target manifold is the sphere SN−1, with the corresponding O(N) symmetry. The Lagrangian (density) of the Nonlinear Sigma Model for a target manifold T of dimension 

d(T) on a (D + 1)-dimensional Minkowski spacetime is 

L(x) = 12

> D

# ∑

> μ,ν=0
> d(T)

# ∑

> a,b=1

ημν gab (Σ(x)) ∂μΣa(x)∂νΣb(x) − V(Σ(x)) , (438) where η is the (D + 1)-dimensional Minkowski metric with ημν = diag (1, −1, −1, . . . , −1). The target manifold T is equipped with a Riemannian metric g, the field is a map Σ : R1, D → T from spacetime into the target, and Σa (a = 1, . . . , d(T)) denotes the components of Σ in a local chart of 

T. Correspondingly, gab (Σ(x)) is the metric of T evaluated at the field value Σ(x). The potential 

V : T → R is a fixed function on the target. It is worth emphasizing the change of viewpoint relative to the main analysis of the paper. There, the dynamical variable is a point “ x” of a manifold. Here, the dynamical variable is the field value Σ, taking values in the manifold T, while the spacetime coordinate x merely labels which copy of Σ we are talking about. This will become concrete in Section 5.1.2, where discretizing space turns the label x into a lattice site and the configuration space into a Cartesian product of copies of T, one per site. We write x = ( t, x) with t ∈ R and x ∈ RD, and split the spacetime index μ ∈ { 0, 1, . . . , D}

accordingly into the time index 0 and the spatial indices i ∈ { 1, . . . , D}. Since ημν is diagonal, the double sum over μ, ν can be carried out explicitly, and the Lagrangian density becomes 

L = 12

> d(T)

# ∑

> a,b=1

gab (Σ) ˙Σa ˙Σb − 12

> D

# ∑

> i=1
> d(T)

# ∑

> a,b=1

gab (Σ) ∂iΣa∂iΣb − V(Σ), (439) where ˙ Σa := ∂0Σa = ∂Σa/∂t, and we have suppressed the evaluation at x throughout. 

Legendre transform: the classical Hamiltonian The momentum conjugate to Σa(x) is 

πa(x) = ∂∂ ˙Σa(x) L(x) = 

> d(T)

# ∑

> b=1

gab (Σ(x)) ˙Σb(x). (440) 106 Since g is positive definite, the matrix (gab (Σ)) d(T) 

> a,b=1

is invertible at every point of T. As in standard notation, we write  gab (Σ)d(T) 

> a,b=1

for its matrix inverse, i.e. the components of the inverse metric, characterized by 

> d(T)

# ∑

> b=1

gab (Σ) gbc (Σ) = δac for all a, c ∈ { 1, . . . , d(T)}, (441) with δac the Kronecker delta. Applying gab to both sides of the previous equation therefore inverts the relation between velocities and momenta, ˙Σa(x) = 

> d(T)

# ∑

> b=1

gab (Σ(x)) πb(x). (442) Substituting into the standard Legendre transform for the Hamiltonian density HH =

> d(T)

# ∑

> a=1

πa ˙Σa − L (443) gives the Hamiltonian HH =

Z

> RD

dD x H(x) = 

Z

> RD

dD x

"

12

> d(T)

# ∑

> a,b=1

gab (Σ)πaπb + 12

> D

# ∑

> i=1
> d(T)

# ∑

> a,b=1

gab (Σ) ∂iΣa∂iΣb + V(Σ)

#

, (444) where the first term is the kinetic term, quadratic in the conjugate momentum π, the second term is the spatial derivative term, involving only Σ but not π, and the last term is the ordinary potential term. This Hamiltonian still describes a field theory in continuous space RD. It carries one copy of the target manifold T, with its own conjugate momentum, for every point x ∈ RD, so the config-uration space is infinite-dimensional and not yet amenable to the quantum simulation algorithm we propose. We therefore discretize the spatial directions while keeping the time t still continuous. 

Spatial lattice regularization To obtain a finite-dimensional configuration space we discretize space on a hypercubic lattice Λ = ( aZ/LZ)D with lattice spacing a and |Λ| = ( L/a)D sites, keeping time continuous. A field configuration is then a collection 

Σ = ( Σn)n∈Λ ∈ M := T|Λ|, (445) so the configuration space is a Cartesian product of |Λ| copies of the fixed manifold T of dimension 

d(T).Replacing R dD x 7 → aD ∑n∈Λ and ∂iΣ 7 → (Σn+a ˆei − Σn)/a where ˆ ei is the unit vector for direc-tion i, the discretized momentum conjugate to Σa 

> n

is pna = aD πa(n), and (444) becomes 

HΛ = ∑

> n∈Λ

12aDd(T)

# ∑

> a,b=1

gab (Σn) pna pnb + V (Σ), (446) 

V (Σ) := aD ∑

> n∈Λ

"

12a2

> D

# ∑

> i=1

dT (Σn+a ˆei , Σn)2 + V(Σn)

#

, (447) 107 where we have used the geodesic distance dT on T as the manifestly chart-independent (and glob-ally well-defined) discretization of ∑d(T) 

> a,b=1

gab ∂iΣa∂iΣb; for nearby field values dT (Σn+a ˆei , Σn)2 =

∑d(T) 

> a,b=1

gab (Σn)δiΣaδiΣb + O(|δiΣ|3) with δiΣ := Σn+a ˆei − Σn, so the two agree in the continuum limit. 

Quantization Equation (446) is the Hamiltonian of a single point particle moving on the Rie-mannian manifold 

(M, G), M = T|Λ|, G := aD M

> n∈Λ

g, (448) i.e. G is the product metric on T|Λ| with each factor rescaled by aD, subject to the potential V.Indeed, the kinetic term of (446) is 12 ∑A,B GAB (Σ)pA pB, where A = ( n, a) is a composite index running over the d(T) |Λ| coordinate directions of M.Quantizing on the Hilbert space L2(M) with the ordering prescription by DeWitt [DeW57], 12 ∑

> A,B

GAB pA pB 7 −→ − ¯h2

2 ∆G, ∆G = 1

√det G ∑

> A,B

∂A

√det G G AB ∂B



, (449) we obtain the quantum Hamiltonian on the spatial lattice, ˆHΛ = − ¯h2

2 ∆G + V (Σ) = − ¯h2

2aD ∑

> n∈Λ

∆(n) 

> g

+ V (Σ) , (450) where ∆(n) 

> g

denotes the Laplace–Beltrami operator of (T, g) acting on the copy of T at site n, and the second equality uses that the Laplace–Beltrami operator of a product metric is the sum of those of its factors, ∆G = a−D ∑n ∆(n) 

> g

.

5.1.3 CPN−1 Models 

The CPN−1 models [Eic78; dLD78] are nonlinear sigma models whose target is complex projective space. In two spacetime dimensions, they are associated with asymptotic freedom and confine-ment, and possess instantons and a θ-vacuum structure. They are for this reason a long-standing toy model for the corresponding phenomena in four-dimensional gauge theory [Wit79]. From our point of view the essential point is that a CPN−1 model is an instance of Section 5.1.2 with a different choice of (T, g). We therefore only need to identify the target manifold and its met-ric. The Legendre transform, lattice regularization and quantization of Section 5.1.2 then naturally apply to the case of CPN−1.

The target manifold and its metric Complex projective space is the set of complex lines through the origin of CN ,

CPN−1 :=

(

z ∈ CN :

> N

# ∑

> a=1

|za|2 = 1

) .

U(1), where U (1) acts by z 7 → eiφz, φ ∈ R, (451) 108 that is, the unit sphere S2N−1 ⊂ CN with points differing by an overall phase identified. 1 It is a compact manifold of real dimension 

d



CPN−1

= 2N − 1 − 1 = 2(N − 1), (452) the two subtractions removing the radial direction and the phase direction respectively. We write 

[z] for the equivalence class of z, and use z itself as homogeneous coordinates, a redundant de-scription in which each point of the manifold corresponds to a whole set of representatives. The natural metric on CPN−1 is the Fubini–Study metric, which in the terms of homogeneous coordinates normalized to |z|2 = 1 in (451) is ds2 =

> N

# ∑

> a,b=1

ga¯bdz ad ¯zb =

> N

# ∑

> a=1

dz ad ¯za −

> N

# ∑

> a=1

¯zadz a

! N

# ∑

> b=1

zbd ¯zb

!

(453) It is invariant under z 7 → eiφz and therefore descends to a Riemannian metric on CPN−1. Writing 

Σa (a = 1, . . . , 2 (N − 1)) for coordinates in a local chart, (453) defines the components gab required as input to Section 5.1.2. 

The continuum Lagrangian The physics literature usually presents the model not through a chart on CPN−1 but in the redundant homogeneous coordinates, with the redundancy promoted to a local gauge symmetry. One introduces a non-dynamical U (1) gauge field Aμ and writes the Lagrangian density 

L = 1

g20

> D

# ∑

> μ,ν=0
> N

# ∑

> a=1

ημν  Dμza (Dνza) , Dμza := ∂μza + iA μza, (454) subject to ∑Na=1 |za|2 = 1, with g0 > 0 the coupling constant. Since Aμ carries no kinetic term, it is an auxiliary field with the equation of motion 

Aμ = i

> N

# ∑

> a=1

¯za∂μza. (455) Substituting (455) back into (454) eliminates Aμ entirely and produces the Lagrangian with the Fubini–Study metric (453) as 

L = 1

g20

> D

# ∑

> μ,ν=0
> N

# ∑

> a,b=1

ημν ga¯b∂μza∂ν ¯zb. (456) 

The lattice Hamiltonian With T = CPN−1 and g the Fubini–Study metric, the construction of Section 5.1.2 applies unchanged. The configuration space is 

M =



CPN−1|Λ|

, (457)         

> 1For N=2 one has CP1∼=S2, so the model coincides with the O(3)nonlinear sigma model of Section 5.1.2.

109 and (450) becomes ˆHΛ = − ¯h2 g20

4aD ∑

> n∈Λ

∆(n) 

> FS

+ aD−2

g20

# ∑

> n∈Λ
> D

# ∑

> i=1

dCPN−1 (Σn+a ˆei , Σn)2 , (458) where ∆FS is the Laplace–Beltrami operator of the Fubini–Study metric and we have set V ≡ 0, the usual choice for this model. The coupling enters asymmetrically because (454) carries an overall 1/ g20 rather than the 1/2 of Section 5.1.2. (Setting g20 = 2 would recover the normalization of (450).) As in Section 5.1.2, this is of the form −∆G + V on a Cartesian product of copies of a single fixed manifold. 

5.1.4 Lattice Gauge Theories 

Lattice gauge theories [Wil74] (LGTs) are the standard non-perturbative regularization of gauge theory, and the Hamiltonian formulation of Kogut and Susskind [KS75] is the natural starting point for quantum simulation [Ba ˜ n+20]. We keep the gauge group G an arbitrary compact con-nected Lie group, so that G = SU (3) recovers lattice QCD and G = U(1) compact lattice electro-dynamics. On a fixed lattice, the Kogut–Susskind Hamiltonian [KS75] is already of the form −∆G + V

on a Cartesian product of copies of a fixed compact manifold, with no further continuum limit needed to bring it there. The target manifold is the gauge group G itself, so its dimension is fixed by the theory and does not grow with the lattice. The one structural difference from Section 5.1.2 is that the degrees of freedom live on the links of the lattice rather than on its sites. We restrict discussions throughout to the gauge degrees of freedom, so that what we describe is more precisely a lattice Yang–Mills theory. This pure-gauge sector already carries much of the essential non-perturbative physics. Moreover, a complete theory such as lattice QCD adds matter fields on the sites, but retains the pure-gauge Hamiltonian below as a summand. Throughout we fix once and for all a faithful unitary representation of G and identify group elements with the corresponding unitary matrices, so that Tr and † below are the ordinary matrix trace and conjugate transpose. 

The configuration space Let Λ = ( aZ/LZ)D be a spatial lattice as in Section 5.1.2, and let 

E := {ℓ = ( n, i) : n ∈ Λ, i ∈ { 1, . . . , D}} , |E | = D |Λ|, (459) denote its set of oriented links, where (n, i) is the link from n to n + a ˆei. A gauge-field configuration assigns to each link a group element, 

U = ( Uℓ)ℓ∈E ∈ M := G|E | , (460) with the reversed link carrying U−ℓ = U−1 

> ℓ

= U† 

> ℓ

. The configuration space is therefore a Cartesian product of D|Λ| copies of the single fixed manifold G, of dimension d(G) = dim g, where g is the Lie algebra of G. For G = SU (N) one has d(G) = N2 − 1, so d(G) = 8 for lattice QCD. The potential term of the LGT will be built from the elementary plaquettes of Λ. For a plaquette 

p spanning directions i < j at site n, let 

Up := U(n,i) U(n+a ˆei , j) U−1   

> (n+aˆej,i)

U−1 

> (n,j)

(461) be the ordered product of the four link variables around its boundary, and write P for the set of plaquettes. 110 The Kogut–Susskind Hamiltonian and the Laplace–Beltrami operator With the temporal gauge and on a lattice with continuous time but finite spatial lattice spacing, the Lagrangian reads [Ham08] 

L = a

4g2 ∑

> ℓ∈E

Tr 

 ˙U† 

> ℓ

˙Uℓ



+ 14ag 2 ∑

> p∈P

Tr 



Up + U†

> p



(462) where a is the spatial lattice spacing, and g > 0 is the gauge coupling constant. Then the Kogut–Susskind Hamiltonian [KS75; Cre77] from the Lagrangian is obtained through the Legendre transform 

H = ∑

> ℓ∈E

˙U†

> ℓ

∂L

∂ ˙U†

> ℓ

+ ˙Uℓ

∂L

∂ ˙Uℓ

!

− L = a

4g2 ∑

> ℓ∈E

Tr 

 ˙U† 

> ℓ

˙Uℓ



− 14ag 2 ∑

> p∈P

Tr 



Up + U†

> p



. (463) To exhibit (463) as a Laplace–Beltrami operator plus a potential, we introduce on each link a local chart of G, writing Uℓ = U(qℓ) with qℓ = ( q1 

> ℓ

, . . . , qd(G) 

> ℓ

). The same chart is used on every link, since all factors of M are copies of the same manifold. By the chain rule ˙ Uℓ = ∑d(G) 

> a=1

∂aU(qℓ) ˙q a 

> ℓ

, so that Tr 

 ˙U† 

> ℓ

˙Uℓ



=

> d(G)

# ∑

> a,b=1

gab (qℓ) ˙q a 

> ℓ

˙q b 

> ℓ

, gab (q) := Tr 



∂aU†(q) ∂bU(q)



, (464) which defines a Riemannian metric on G. The momentum conjugate to q a 

> ℓ

is 

πℓa = ∂L

∂ ˙q a

> ℓ

= a

2g2

> d(G)

# ∑

> b=1

gab (qℓ) ˙q b 

> ℓ

, equivalently ˙q a 

> ℓ

= 2g2

a

> d(G)

# ∑

> b=1

gab (qℓ) πℓb, (465) and substituting into (463) gives the classical Hamiltonian in canonical form, 

H(q, π) = g2

a ∑

> ℓ∈E
> d(G)

# ∑

> a,b=1

gab (qℓ) πℓaπℓb − 14ag 2 ∑

> p∈P

Tr 



Up(q) + U† 

> p

(q)



. (466) The first term is the kinetic term of a particle on the product manifold M = G|E | carrying the product metric, and the second term is a potential term that depends on q alone. Similar to the discussion of Section 5.1.2, (466) is the Hamiltonian of a single point particle moving on the Riemannian manifold 

(M, G), M = G|E | , G := a

2g2

> M
> ℓ∈E

g, (467) that is, G is the product metric on G|E | with each factor carrying the metric (464) rescaled by 

a/(2g2), subject to the potential V. Indeed, with this choice the kinetic term of (466) is 12 ∑A,B GAB (q) πAπB,where A = ( ℓ, a) is a composite index running over the d(G) |E | coordinate directions of M.Quantizing on L2(M) with the same ordering prescription (449) therefore gives ˆH = − ¯h2

2 ∆G + V (q) = − g2 ¯h2

a ∑

> ℓ∈E

∆(ℓ) 

> G

+ V (q), V (q) := − 14ag 2 ∑

> p∈P

Tr 



Up(q) + U† 

> p

(q)



,(468) where ∆(ℓ) 

> G

is the Laplace–Beltrami operator of (G, g) acting on the copy of G at link ℓ, and the second equality again uses that the Laplace–Beltrami operator of a product metric is the sum of those of its factors. This is the announced form −∆G + V on a Cartesian product of copies of the single fixed compact manifold G.111 5.1.5 Concrete simulation of the spatially discretized O(N) nonlinear sigma model 

We now give a concrete application of the sphere algorithm to a particular lattice realization of the nonlinear sigma model. Let O(N) be the orthogonal group of real N × N matrices that preserve the Euclidean inner product on RN . An O(N) field takes values in the unit sphere SN−1 ⊂ RN ,and the group acts on every field value by the same orthogonal transformation. The round metric and any interaction formed from inner products of field values are invariant under this action. Fix N ≥ 3, let Λ = ( aZ/LZ)D be a finite periodic spatial lattice, and write nΛ := |Λ|. Afield configuration is a tuple σ = ( σn)n∈Λ ∈ (SN−1)nΛ . We use the squared chordal distance in the ambient Euclidean space. Each coordinate function σa on SN−1 is a degree-one spherical harmonic, so 1 − σ · σ′ contains only degrees zero and one in each spin variable. Multiplication by one nearest-neighbor interaction therefore raises the spherical-harmonic degree at either endpoint by at most one. The interaction depends only on the inner product and hence preserves the O(N)

symmetry. Since 12 ∥σ − σ′∥22 = 1 − σ · σ′ on the unit sphere, the resulting Hamiltonian is 

HO(N) 

> Λ

:= − ¯h2

2aD ∑

> n∈Λ

∆(n) 

> SN−1

+ Vch (σ), Vch (σ) := aD−2 ∑

> n∈Λ
> D

# ∑

> i=1

 1 − σn · σn+abei

 . (469) The chordal interaction agrees with the squared geodesic interaction to leading order for neigh-boring field values. The special case N = 3 has target S2 and gives the spatially discretized O(3)

model used to describe Heisenberg antiferromagnets. It is natural now to use the quantum algorithm for simulating dynamcis on the sphere. To formalize the setup, let Hℓ(SN−1) denote the degree-ℓ spherical harmonics and define 

V Λ 

> J

:= O

> n∈Λ
> JM
> ℓ=0

Hℓ(SN−1)

!

⊂ L2

(SN−1)nΛ



. (470) A function belongs to V Λ 

> J

when its spherical-harmonic degree is at most J at every lattice site. Products satisfy 

V Λ 

> J

V Λ 

> K

⊆ V Λ

> J+K

. (471) The preceding degree-one observation implies Vch ∈ V Λ 

> 1

, and 

∥V ch ∥∞ ≤ Λch := max 

n

1, 2 aD−2 Dn Λ

o

. (472) Let ψ0 ∈ V Λ 

> J0

be normalized, let T > 0, and fix 0 < ϵ < 1. Choose 

q := ⌈max {2eT Λch , 2 + log 2(1/ ϵ)}⌉ , J := J0 + q − 1, Q := J + 1, (473) and set R := Q + 1 and Mφ := 2Q + 1. Let WS,J,Q be the single-site weighted evaluation isometry from Theorem 3.17, and define the product transform and product grid by 

WΛ := O

> n∈Λ

WS,J,Q, GΛ 

> Q

:=



GSN−1

> R,Mφ

nΛ

. (474) Let DΛ,J := ∑n∈Λ D(n) 

> J

be the diagonal kinetic matrix in the product spherical-harmonic basis and let 

bVch,Q := ∑

> x∈G Λ
> Q

Vch (x) |x⟩⟨ x| , bHΛ,J,Q := ¯h2

2aD DΛ,J + W† 

> Λ

bVch,Q WΛ. (475) 112 Theorem 5.1 (Digital simulation of the spatially discretized O(N) model) . Let the lattice, Hamilto-nian, initial state, and cutoffs be as above. Let S Λ,J map product spherical-harmonic coefficients to functions in V Λ 

> J

. Assume that a circuit using Cprep gates and Qprep work qubits prepares the coefficient state S † 

> Λ,J

ψ0

to state error O(ϵ). At a product quadrature node, the potential (469) can be evaluated reversibly by com-puting the Dn Λ nearest-neighbor inner products. Let Cch denote the gate cost of this evaluation and its uncomputation to absolute error ϵch , and assume T ϵch = O(ϵ).Then the tensor product of the spherical transforms in Theorem 3.17, combined with interaction-picture Hamiltonian simulation as in Theorem 3.19, produces a normalized coefficient state |ec(T)⟩ such that, with success probability at least 1 − O (ϵ),

SΛ,J |ec(T)⟩ − e−iTH O(N) 

> Λ

ψ0 = O(ϵ). (476) 

Put τch := TΛch . The number of calls to the reversible potential-evaluation circuit or its inverse is Nch = O



(1 + τch ) log (ee(1 + τch )/ϵ)

log log (ee(1 + τch )/ϵ)



= eO(1 + τch ). (477) 

The gate complexity is 

Cgates = Cprep + eO



(1 + τch )



nΛ(N − 1)( J + 1)( Q + 1)2 + Cch + log 2

 2Λch 

ϵch 

 

, (478) 

and the total qubit count is 

Qprep + O



nΛ(N − 1) log (Q + 1) + log 2Λch 

ϵch 

+ polylog nΛ(N − 1)( J + 1)( Q + 1)( 1 + τch )

ϵ



.(479) 

For fixed D, N, a, T, and J 0, these resources are polynomial in n Λ and 1/ ϵ.Proof. The kinetic operator is diagonal in the product spherical-harmonic basis and preserves ev-ery space V Λ 

> J

. Equation (471) and Vch ∈ V Λ 

> 1

show that the interaction-picture Dyson terms of orders below q lie in V Λ 

> J

. The tensor product of the single-site quadrature rules is Q-exact for the product filtration. Since Q = J + 1, Proposition 3.5 identifies the quadrature compression of 

Vch with its Galerkin compression. Corollary 3.6, with fK = f = Vch and B1 = T, bounds the discretization error by 2 2−q ≤ ϵ.The product transform is implemented by applying the compiled single-site transform at ev-ery lattice site. Synthesizing each factor to operator error δ/nΛ makes the product-transform error at most δ. The kinetic phase is computed from the sum of the single-site eigenvalues ℓ(ℓ + N − 2),and the sampled potential is computed from the nearest-neighbor inner products. The interaction-picture proof of Theorem 3.19 therefore applies with one forward and one inverse product trans-form in each potential query. A product transform invokes nΛ single-site transforms, each with sphere dimension N − 1 and spectral cutoff J, so its gate cost is eO(nΛ(N − 1)( J + 1)( Q + 1)2).Substituting this cost, the potential-evaluation cost Cch , and the normalization Λch into (187)–(189) proves (476)–(479). 113 5.2 Connection to quantum interior-point methods 

Let X ⊆ Rd be a convex set with nonempty interior, and consider the convex optimization prob-lem min  

> x∈X

⟨c, x⟩. (480) Given a ϑ-self-concordant barrier Φ : int (X ) → R, path-following interior-point methods con-sider the barrier objectives 

Vη (x) := η⟨c, x⟩ + Φ(x), x(η) := arg min  

> x∈int (X)

Vη (x). (481) As η increases, the central path {x(η)}η>0 approaches the optimal set of (480). The Hessian of the barrier defines the local metric gΦ = ∇2Φ. Since the objective is linear, it is also the Hessian of Vη ,and the Newton step at an interior point x is 

−∇ 2Φ(x)−1 ηc + ∇Φ(x). (482) Thus the same local geometry determines the Newton direction, the Dikin ellipsoid in which a step remains feasible, and the notion of proximity used to follow the central path. Self-concordance controls the variation of this metric between nearby points and is the central regularity property in the classical path-following analysis [NN88; NN94; Ren01]. Gribling, Apers, Nieuwboer, and Walter proposed a quantum analogue of this path-following picture [Gri+25]. They associate to each value of η the Riemannian Schr ¨ odinger operator 

HR(η) := − 12 ∆Φ + γ2Vη , (483) where ∆Φ is the Laplace–Beltrami operator of gΦ = ∇2Φ and γ is a semiclassical parameter. In the barrier metric, the harmonic approximation near x(η) is normalized, rather than inheriting the Euclidean condition number of ∇2Φ(x(η)) . Their analysis makes this intuition quantitative: 

Theorem 5.2 ([Gri+25, Theorem 1.2]) . There is a universal constant C > 0 such that, for d ≥ 2 and 

γ ≥ C(d log d)5, the operators in (483) satisfy, for every η ≥ 0,

λ1(HR(η)) − λ0(HR(η)) ≥ γ

2 . (484) In particular, this lower bound is uniform along the central path and has no dependence on a Euclidean Hessian condition number. Early quantum interior-point methods used quantum linear-system algorithms to approximate the Newton direction at each iteration, and their run-times consequently depended polynomially on a uniform upper bound for the condition numbers of the Newton systems encountered along the central path [Aug+23b; KP18]. Such a bound may be large and must hold over the entire run. By incorporating the barrier Hessian into the kinetic geometry, the Riemannian construction removes this particular dependence from the spectral-gap estimate underlying quantum path following. For sufficiently large γ, the corresponding ground state is concentrated near x(η). The cited work uses these states to define a discrete quantum central path: under assumptions including an initial state with sufficient ground-state overlap, estimates of the ground-state energies, and access to controlled Riemannian Hamiltonian evolu-tion, rotations about a sequence of neighboring ground states prepare a state concentrated near an approximate optimizer. 114 The simulation results of this paper address one of the primitives required by that framework. For the standard logarithmic barrier Φ(x) = − ∑di=1 log xi on the positive orthant, Theorem 3.11 gives a digital discretization of the evolution generated by −∆Φ plus a bounded Lipschitz poten-tial after restricting to a box [a, b]d and imposing Dirichlet boundary conditions. For any fixed η,the restriction of Vη to this box is such a potential, so the theorem applies to a compactly truncated version of HR(η), subject to its stated initial-state and regularity hypotheses. This provides a rig-orous finite-dimensional simulation result in a canonical barrier geometry, but it does not by itself instantiate the complete quantum path-following algorithm. Several additional steps would be needed to instantiate an end-to-end algorithm. In partic-ular, one must choose a truncation that works uniformly over the relevant central-path param-eters, control the effect of its artificial boundary on ground-state concentration, spectral gaps, and neighboring-state overlaps, and account for controlled simulation, ground-energy estima-tion, state preparation, and readout. The orthant result should be viewed as a digital simulation primitive whose integration into a fully discrete quantum interior-point method remains an open problem. 

5.3 Riemannian Quantum Hamiltonian Descent 

In this section, we extend Quantum Hamiltonian Descent [Len+23] to non-Euclidean geometry. Abe and Nagai recently proposed Riemannian Quantum Hamiltonian Descent at the operator and path-integral levels, derived semiclassical equations of motion, and numerically studied rep-resentative examples [AN26]. They also gave a conditional oracle-level simulation analysis, as-suming phase-oracle access to the objective and sparse access to a chosen discretization of the Laplace–Beltrami operator. Complementing this formulation, we develop rigorous convergence guarantees for geodesically convex objectives, including the relevant boundary terms, and com-bine them with explicit digital simulation algorithms on the sphere and the Fisher–Rao simplex. These results make the Riemannian QHD algorithm concrete in settings where the required geo-metric Hamiltonians can be implemented and analyzed explicitly. 

5.3.1 Additional Preliminaries 

We record the differential-geometric identities used in the computation relevant to this subsection. Here we note ∇V ψ = V(ψ) for vector field V. Metric compatibility of the Levi–Civita connection gives the covariant product rule 

X ⟨Y, Z⟩g = ⟨∇ XY, Z⟩g + ⟨Y, ∇X Z⟩g . (485) For a smooth scalar function u, its Hessian is the covariant 2-tensor Hess u(X, Y) = ⟨∇ X ∇u, Y⟩g = X(Yu ) − (∇XY)u, (486) and ∆gu is its metric trace. The first equality means that the Hessian and the covariant derivative of the gradient contain the same information: 

∇X ∇u = ( Hess u(X, ·)) ♯. (487) Here, Hess u(X, ·) is the 1-form obtained by fixing the first slot and ♯ converts that 1-form to a vector using the metric. Thus the Hessian is the Riemannian analogue of the Jacobian matrix of the vector field ∇u.115 The divergence of a covariant 2-tensor S is the 1-form 

(div S)( Y) = 

> d

# ∑

> i=1

(∇ei S)( ei, Y). (488) At any fixed point q, one can choose a local orthonormal frame e1, . . . , ed that is geodesic at q,meaning ∇ei ej = 0 at q. At that point, Hess u(ei, ej) = ei(eju), ∆gu =

> d

# ∑

> i=1

ei(eiu). (489) Then, (487) becomes 

∇ei ∇u =

> d

# ∑

> j=1

Hess u(ei, ej)ej. (490) Taking the trace of the Hessian gives the scalar Laplacian 

∆gu =

> d

# ∑

> i=1

Hess u(ei, ei). (491) From the covariant derivative product rule and setting v = ∇ei ∇u yields 

ei⟨v, ej⟩g = ⟨∇ ei v, ej⟩g = ( ∇ei Hess u)( ei, ej).Hence differentiating (490) once more in the ei direction and then summing gives a vector: 

∆rough  

> g

∇u :=

> d

# ∑

> i=1

∇ei ∇ei ∇u

=

> d

# ∑

> i,j=1

(∇ei Hess u)( ei, ej)ej at q. (492) In contrast applying the gradient after the Laplacian gives: 

∇∆gu =

> d

# ∑

> i,j=1

(∇ej Hess u)( ei, ei)ej at q. (493) The expressions (492) and (493) trace different pairs of the three indices of ∇ Hess u. Interchanging those indices produces the Ricci curvature term derived below. In flat Euclidean space all covari-ant derivatives are ordinary partial derivatives, so the indices commute and the two expressions agree. The frame removes connection coefficients at q, but not their derivatives; the latter are what produce curvature when third covariant derivatives are commuted. With the curvature convention, we obtain the Ricci curvature tensor R:

R(X, Y)Z = ∇X ∇Y Z − ∇ Y ∇X Z − ∇ [X,Y] Z, (494) 116 the vector R(X, Y)Z measures the failure of covariant derivatives of the vector field Z to commute in the directions X and Y. Specifically, it follows that 

(∇X Hess u)( Y, Z) − (∇Y Hess u)( X, Z) = ⟨R(X, Y)∇u, Z⟩g . (495) The Riemannian QHD convergence proof relies heavily on the following lemmas. For sym-metric differential expressions X and Y on a common smooth core, set 

cX,Y [ψ] := i (⟨Xψ, Yψ⟩ − ⟨ Yψ, Xψ⟩) . (496) This definition requires only Xψ, Yψ ∈ L2, not that either XY ψ or YX ψ belong to an operator domain. Whenever both compositions are defined, it equals ⟨ψ, i[X, Y]ψ⟩. Pointwise differential commutators below are used only as intermediate identities for evaluating (496). 

Lemma 5.3. Let V = ∇ϕ and AV := 12 (V · p + p · V) = −i



∇V + 12 div V



.

For smooth u , v on Ω,

⟨u, AV v⟩L2(Ω) − ⟨ AV u, v⟩L2(Ω) = −i

> Z
> ∂Ω

u v ⟨V, n⟩g dSg.

Proof. Let V = ∇ϕ. First, 

(V · p)ψ = −i∇V ψ. (497) The dot product · is with respect to the metric g. In the reverse ordering, p also differentiates the coefficient V. Invariantly, this ordering is the divergence of the vector field Vψ:

(p · V)ψ = −i div (Vψ)= −i (( div V)ψ + ∇V ψ) , (498) where the second line is the divergence product rule. Averaging the two gives 12 (V · p + p · V)ψ = −i



∇V + 12 div V



ψ. (499) The divergence term also explains why the symmetrized operator is formally self-adjoint. To see the integration-by-parts step explicitly, apply the divergence theorem to the vector field 

W = u v V . (500) The divergence product rule gives div W = div (u v V )= u ∇V v + v ∇V u + ( div V)u v . (501) The Riemannian divergence theorem states that 

> Z
> Ω

div W d vol g =

> Z
> ∂Ω

⟨W, n⟩g dSg =

> Z
> ∂Ω

u v ⟨V, n⟩g dSg, (502) 117 where n is the outward unit normal. Substituting (501) and moving the last two volume terms to the other side yields the full integration-by-parts identity 

> Z
> Ω

u ∇V v d vol g = −

> Z
> Ω

(∇V u + ( div V)u) v d vol g +

> Z
> ∂Ω

u v ⟨V, n⟩g dSg. (503) Then 

> Z
> Ω

u i 



−∇ V − 12 div (V)



v d vol g =

> Z
> Ω

i



−∇ V u − 12 (div V)u



v d vol g

− i

> Z
> ∂Ω

u v ⟨V, n⟩g dSg.For V = ∇ϕ, the identity can be computed further using div V = ∆gϕ; set 

B = ∇V + 12 ∆gϕ, AV = −iB . (504) Then we can use the alternative expression for A∇ϕ and arrive at the following critical identity. 

Lemma 5.4. Let ϕ ∈ C4(Ω) be real, V = ∇ϕ, ψ ∈ C∞(Ω), and define Bϕ = ∇V + 12 ∆gϕ, AV = −iB ϕ.

Also define the total boundary functional 

Bϕ[ψ] := Re 

> Z
> ∂Ω

h

− 2ψ Hess ϕ(∇ψ, n) − (∂nψ)Bϕψ + ψ ∂ n(Bϕψ) + ( ∂nϕ)ψ K0ψ

i

dSg. (505) 

If 

cϕ[ψ] := cK0,AV [ψ] = i (⟨K0ψ, AV ψ⟩ − ⟨ AV ψ, K0ψ⟩) , (506) 

then 

cϕ[ψ] = 2

> Z
> Ω

Hess ϕ(∇ψ, ∇ψ) d vol g − 12

> Z
> Ω

(∆2

> g

ϕ)|ψ|2 d vol g +Bϕ[ψ]. (507) 

Proof. By the definition of AV ,

cϕ[ψ] = 2 Re ⟨K0ψ, Bϕψ⟩. (508) We first compute the formal differential commutator in the interior of the domain. This is an intermediate identity, not yet the commutator form. Since i[K0, AV ] = [ K0, Bϕ] formally, we seek to compute the following: 

[−∆g, ∇V + 12 ∆gϕ]ψ = −[∆g, ∇V ]ψ − 12 [∆g, ∆gϕ]ψ,

[∆g, ∇V ]ψ = ∆g⟨∇ ϕ, ∇ψ⟩g − ⟨∇ ϕ, ∇∆gψ⟩g,

[∆g, ∆gϕ]ψ = ∆g(( ∆gϕ)ψ) − (∆gϕ)( ∆gψ) = ( ∆2

> g

ϕ)ψ + 2 ∇∆gϕ, ∇ψ g .118 Consider a point q and a local geodesic frame e1, . . . , ed:

ei

 ei⟨∇ ϕ, ∇ψ⟩g

 = ei⟨∇ ei ∇ϕ, ∇ψ⟩g + ei⟨∇ ϕ, ∇ei ∇ψ⟩g

= ⟨∇ ei ∇ei ∇ϕ, ∇ψ⟩g + 2⟨∇ ei ∇ϕ, ∇ei ∇ψ⟩g

+ ⟨∇ ϕ, ∇ei ∇ei ∇ψ⟩g.Then using the definition of Riemannian Hessian in a geodesic frame, the above implies 

∆g ⟨∇ ϕ, ∇ψ⟩g =

> d

# ∑

> i=1



⟨∇ ei ∇ei ∇ϕ, ∇ψ⟩g + 2 ⟨∇ ei ∇ϕ, ∇ei ∇ψ⟩g

+ ⟨∇ ϕ, ∇ei ∇ei ∇ψ⟩g



. (509) By definition and the chosen frame, the middle sum is 

> d

# ∑

> i=1

⟨∇ ei ∇ϕ, ∇ei ∇ψ⟩g =

> d

# ∑

> i,j=1

Hess ϕ(ei, ej) Hess ψ(ei, ej) = : Hess ϕ : Hess ψ. (510) Consequently, 

∆g ⟨∇ ϕ, ∇ψ⟩g =

D

∆rough  

> g

∇ϕ, ∇ψ

E 

> g

+ 2 Hess ϕ : Hess ψ +

D

∇ϕ, ∆rough  

> g

∇ψ

E 

> g

. (511) We have the identity 

∆rough  

> g

∇u = ∇∆gu + Ric ♯(∇u), (512) where Ric (Y, ∇u) = 

D

Ric ♯(∇u), Y

E 

> g

with Ric ♯(Y) :=  Ric (Y, ·)♯. Then using the above identity we have 

D

∆rough  

> g

∇ϕ, ∇ψ

E 

> g

+

D

∇ϕ, ∆rough  

> g

∇ψ

E 

> g

= ⟨∇ ∆gϕ, ∇ψ⟩g + ⟨∇ ϕ, ∇∆gψ⟩g +

D

Ric ♯(∇ϕ), ∇ψ

E

> g

+

D

Ric ♯(∇ψ), ∇ϕ

E

> g

= ⟨∇ ∆gϕ, ∇ψ⟩g + ⟨∇ ϕ, ∇∆gψ⟩g + 2

D

Ric ♯(V), ∇ψ

E 

> g

,where we used the symmetry of the Ricci tensor. Thus 

∆g ⟨∇ ϕ, ∇ψ⟩g − ⟨∇ ϕ, ∇∆gψ⟩g = 2 Hess ϕ : Hess ψ + ⟨∇ ∆gϕ + 2Ric ♯(∇ϕ), ∇ψ⟩g.So far we have that 

i[K, AV ]ψ = −2 Hess ϕ : Hess ψ − 2⟨∇ ∆gϕ + Ric ♯(∇ϕ), ∇ψ⟩g − 12 (∆2

> g

ϕ)ψ.The last link is the following identity 

Z

> M

Hess ϕ(∇ψ, ∇ψ) dvol g −

Z

> ∂M

ψHess ϕ(∇ψ, ν)dS g

=

Z

> M

−ψ Hess ϕ : Hess ψ dvol g −

Z

> M

ψ

D

∇∆gϕ + Ric ♯(V), ∇ψ

E 

> g

dvol g, (513) 119 which proves the main result. We complete the proof by deriving the two identities (512) and (513) used above. First we prove (512). Expressions such as ∇Y Hess u are defined using a vector field near q, so we first extend the single tangent vector Y to a local vector field eY. This can be done with 

eY(q) = Y, ∇X eY(q) = 0 for every X ∈ Tq M. (514) We henceforth write Y for this extension. Set X = Z = ei in (495) and sum over i. This gives 

> d

# ∑

> i=1

[( ∇ei Hess u)( ei, Y) − (∇Y Hess u)( ei, ei)] = 

> d

# ∑

> i=1

⟨R(ei, Y)∇u, ei⟩g . (515) We identify the two terms separately. At the center of the geodesic frame, 

> d

# ∑

> i=1

(∇ei Hess u)( ei, Y) = 

D

∆rough  

> g

∇u, Y

E 

> g

, (516) 

> d

# ∑

> i=1

(∇Y Hess u)( ei, ei) = Y

> d

# ∑

> i=1

Hess u(ei, ei)

!

= Y(∆gu) = ∇∆gu, Y g . (517) Since the equality holds for every Y ∈ Tq M, we obtain the desired identity (512). To prove the identity (513), start with 

(div Hess ϕ)( Y) = 

> d

# ∑

> i=1

(∇ei Hess ϕ)( ei, Y). (518) Using the symmetry of the Hessian, (495) and a geodesic frame we get 

> d

# ∑

> i=1

(∇ei Hess u)( ei, Y) = 

> d

# ∑

> i=1

(∇ei Hess u)( Y, ei)=

> d

# ∑

> i=1

(∇Y Hess u)( ei, ei) + 

> d

# ∑

> i=1

⟨R(ei, Y)∇ϕ, ei⟩g

= Y

> d

# ∑

> i=1

Hess ϕ(ei, ei)

!

+

D

Ric ♯(∇ϕ), Y

E

> g

= ∇∆gϕ, Y g +

D

Ric ♯(∇ϕ), Y

E 

> g

.Therefore 

(div Hess ϕ)( ∇ψ) = 

D

∇∆gϕ + Ric ♯(V), ∇ψ

E 

> g

. (519) Consider 

∇∇ψ∇ϕ =

> d

# ∑

> i,j=1

Hess ϕ(ei, ej)( eiψ)ej,120 and take the divergence div (∇∇ψ∇ϕ) = 

> d

# ∑

> i,j=1

ej[Hess ϕ(ei, ej)( eiψ)] =

> d

# ∑

> i,j=1

ej(Hess ϕ(ei, ej))( eiψ) + 

> d

# ∑

> i,j=1

(Hess ϕ(ei, ej)) ej(eiψ)=

> d

# ∑

> i,j=1

(∇ej Hess ϕ(ei, ej))( eiψ) + 

> d

# ∑

> i,j=1

(Hess ϕ(ei, ej)) ej(eiψ)= ( div Hess ϕ)( ∇ψ) + Hess ϕ : Hess ψ,where the third equality follows from the frame being geodesic and the covariant derivative prod-uct rule. Combining with (519), div (∇∇ψ∇ϕ) = 

D

∇∆gϕ + Ric ♯(∇ϕ), ∇ψ

E 

> g

+ Hess ϕ : Hess ψ.Thus on the interior of Ω:

i[K, AV ]ψ = −2div (∇∇ψ∇ϕ) − 12 (∆2

> g

ϕ)ψ.Integration by parts, without imposing a boundary condition, gives 

⟨ψ, i[K, AV ]ψ⟩ = 2

Z

> Ω

Hess ϕ(∇ψ, ∇ψ) d vol g − 12

Z

> Ω

(∆2

> g

ϕ)|ψ|2 d vol g

− 2

Z

> ∂Ω

ψ Hess ϕ(∇ψ, n) dSg. (520) The following Green’s identities compare this interior expression with the commutator form: 

⟨ψ, K0 Bϕψ⟩ − ⟨ K0ψ, Bϕψ⟩ =

Z

> ∂Ω

h

(∂nψ)Bϕψ − ψ ∂ n(Bϕψ)

i

dSg, (521) 

⟨ψ, BϕK0ψ⟩ + ⟨Bϕψ, K0ψ⟩ =

Z

> ∂Ω

(∂nϕ)ψ K0ψ dSg. (522) Subtracting (522) from (521) and using (508) yields 

cϕ[ψ] = Re ⟨ψ, i[K, AV ]ψ⟩ + Re 

Z

> ∂Ω

h

−(∂nψ)Bϕψ + ψ ∂ n(Bϕψ) + ( ∂nϕ)ψ K0ψ

i

dSg. (523) Combining (520) and (523) proves (507). Equipped with the above lemma, We can simply extend the identity (507) to the whole domain of some self-adjoint realization of the Laplace–Beltrami operator. 

Proposition 5.5 (Domain Extension) . Let K be a nonnegative self-adjoint realization of K 0 = −∆g with a smooth operator core D ⊂ C∞(Ω) ∩ Dom (K) on which K = K0. Equip Dom (K) with the graph norm 

∥u∥2 

> K

:= ∥u∥22 + ∥Ku ∥22. (524) 121 Assume that the inclusion Dom (K) ,→ H1(Ω) and the map A V : Dom (K) → L2(Ω) are graph-norm continuous. Define, for u ∈ Dom (K),

cK 

> ϕ

[u] := i (⟨Ku , AV u⟩ − ⟨ AV u, Ku ⟩) . (525) 

Then the classical boundary functional (505) , initially defined on D, has a unique graph-norm continuous extension to Dom (K), namely 

BK 

> ϕ

[u] := cK 

> ϕ

[u] − 2

> Z
> Ω

Hess ϕ(∇u, ∇u) d vol g

+ 12

> Z
> Ω

(∆2

> g

ϕ)|u|2 d vol g . (526) 

Consequently, every u ∈ Dom (K) satisfies the closed quadratic-form identity 

cK 

> ϕ

[u] = 2

> Z
> Ω

Hess ϕ(∇u, ∇u) d vol g − 12

> Z
> Ω

(∆2

> g

ϕ)|u|2 d vol g +BK 

> ϕ

[u]. (527) 

Proof. The assumptions make u 7 → AV u continuous from the graph domain to L2, so (525) is graph-norm continuous. The two bulk integrals are graph-norm continuous by the continuous embedding into H1, the boundedness of Hess ϕ, and ∆2

> g

ϕ ∈ L∞. Hence (526) is graph-norm con-tinuous. On D, Lemma 5.4 identifies it with the classical boundary functional. Since D is an operator core, it is graph-norm dense in Dom (K), proving uniqueness and (527). We will choose to consider the setting of Dirichlet boundary conditions on the operator −∆g

over Ω ⊆ M. Under these conditions, a few of the boundary terms simplify. For example AV

becomes a symmetric operator on the common core by Lemma 5.3. Graph continuity of AV and graph density of the core extend the symmetry to Dom (K).Elliptic regularity makes the graph norm of KD equivalent to the H2 norm. Thus AV : H2 → L2

and the inclusion into H1 are continuous, so Proposition 5.5 applies. Moreover, the normal-trace map H2(Ω) → H1/2 (∂Ω) is continuous. Approximating by the smooth Dirichlet operator core in graph norm and using (531) proves the extension of (507) to the domain of K.For Dirichlet boundary conditions the boundary gradient is purely normal: 

∇ψ = ( ∂nψ)n on ∂Ω. (528) Since V = ∇ϕ and the zeroth-order term in Bϕψ contains the vanishing factor ψ, equation (528) gives 

Bϕψ = ⟨∇ ϕ, ∇ψ⟩g + 12 (∆gϕ)ψ = ( ∂nϕ)∂nψ on ∂Ω. (529) Now inspect the four terms in (505). The first, third, and fourth contain the factor ψ and therefore vanish. The remaining term is 

− Re 

> Z
> ∂Ω

(∂nψ)Bϕψ dSg = −

> Z
> ∂Ω

(∂nϕ)|∂nψ|2 dSg, (530) where (529) was used and ∂nϕ is real. This proves 

Bϕ[ψ] = −

> Z
> ∂Ω

(∂nϕ)|∂nψ|2 dSg. (531) 122 The Hamiltonian is 

H(t) = ct

 K

2mt

+ mtω2 

> t

f



, (532) where mt, ωt, ct > 0 and K = −∆g is the Dirichlet operator on Ω ⊂ M. We assume the schedule obeys ˙mt

mt

= λct, λ > 0. (533) Define 

Pt = −imt

∇ + λV, (534) and define its nonnegative quadratic form by 

Tt[ψ] := 12 ∥Ptψ∥22. (535) The Lyapunov functional is 

Et = Tt[ψt] + ω2 

> t

⟨ f − f⋆⟩t, f⋆ = f (x⋆). (536) Expanding Tt[ψ] gives 12

> Z
> Ω

−i∇ψ

mt

+ λVψ

> 2
> g

dvol g = 12m2

> t
> Z
> Ω

|∇ ψ|2 

> g

dvol g

+ λ

2mt

> Z
> Ω

 ⟨− i∇ψ, Vψ⟩g + ⟨Vψ, −i∇ψ⟩g

 dvol g

+ λ2

2

> Z
> Ω

|V|2

> g

|ψ|2 dvol g.In particular, Z

> Ω

⟨Vψ, −i∇ψ⟩g dvol g = −i

> Z
> Ω

ψ ∇V ψ dvol g.Using the same integration by parts as in Lemma 5.3, together with the symmetry of AV , the sum of the two cross terms is 2 ⟨AV ⟩ψ. Therefore 

Tt[ψ] = 12m2

> t

⟨K⟩ψ + λ

mt

⟨AV ⟩ψ + λ2

2 ⟨| V|2

> g

⟩ψ., (537) All terms in (537) are real, and nonnegativity follows directly from the definition of Tt.

Theorem 5.6 (QHD convergence with a favorable boundary form) . Let Ω ⊂ M be a geodesically convex, compact domain with smooth boundary, let x ⋆ ∈ Ω, and suppose Ω is contained in a normal neighborhood of x ⋆. Set 

ϕ = 12 dg(·, x⋆)2, CM = ∥∆2

> g

ϕ∥L∞ (Ω), (538) 

and suppose Hess (ϕ) ⪯ g on Ω. Let f ∈ W1, ∞(Ω) be real and geodesically convex, minimized at x ⋆. Let K be a Dirichlet realization. Let normalized ψ0 ∈ Dom (K) and let ψt be the corresponding strong solution of 

123 the Schrodinger equation with Hamiltonian (532) , with regularity (543) . Assume only along this trajectory that 

BK 

> ϕ

[ψt] ≤ 0. (539) 

Let m t, ωt, ct be positive C 1 functions on the time interval. If (533) holds and 

2 ˙ωt

ωt

≤ λct, (540) 

then 

Et ≤ E 0 + CM

8m20

. (541) 

Consequently, 

⟨ f − f⋆⟩t ≤



E0 + CM

8m20



ω−2 

> t

. (542) 

Proof. We compute ˙ Et in quadratic form. Let ψ satisfy 

ψ ∈ C([ 0, T]; Dom (K)) ∩ C1([ 0, T]; L2(Ω)) , (543) and i∂tψt = H(t)ψt, where Dom (K) carries its graph norm. All commutators below are interpreted as quadratic-form identities on this trajectory. Differentiate Tt[ψt] once, treating it as a time-dependent quadratic form. Its explicit derivative is 

(∂tTt)[ ψt] = − ˙mt

m3

> t

qK [ψt] − λ ˙mt

m2

> t

⟨AV ⟩t. (544) The state-evolution part, obtained from (537), is ˙Et = ( ∂tTt)[ ψt] + 2 ˙ ωtωt⟨ f − f⋆⟩t

+ ctω2

> t

2mt

 c f ,K [ψt] + cK, f [ψt]

+ ctλ

2m2

> t

cK,AV [ψt] + ctλω 2 

> t

c f ,AV [ψt] + ctλ2

4mt

cK,|V|2 

> g

[ψt]. (545) In particular, the explicit derivative in (544) occurs exactly once. The two forms coupling K and f

vanish because ctω2

> t

2mt

 cK, f [ψt] + c f ,K [ψt] = 0 (546) by antisymmetry of (496). For f ∈ W1, ∞(Ω), the relation i[ f , AV ] = − ⟨∇ f , V⟩g is understood as a quadratic-form iden-tity with the weak gradient. It gives 

c f ,AV [ψt] = −

D

⟨∇ f , V⟩g

E 

> t

. (547) Its contribution is therefore −λctω2 

> t

⟨⟨∇ f , V⟩g⟩t. Thus the complete potential contribution to ˙ Et is 2 ˙ ωtωt⟨ f − f⋆⟩t − λctω2 

> t

⟨⟨∇ f , V⟩g⟩t. (548) 124 Geodesic convexity along the unique minimizing geodesic from x to x⋆, together with Rademacher differentiability, gives 

f − f⋆ ≤ ⟨∇ f , V⟩g

almost everywhere with respect to Riemannian volume. Hence (548) is bounded above by 

ω2

> t



2 ˙ωt

ωt

− λct



⟨ f − f⋆⟩t. (549) It remains to analyze the remaining kinetic parts. Using (537), its contribution to ˙ Et is 

ct

2mt

 λ

mt

cK 

> ϕ

[ψt] + λ2

2 cK,|V|2 

> g

[ψt]



. (550) The first term is given completely by (527). For a smooth real multiplier h, the gradient-form identity 

qK [u, v] = 

> Z
> Ω

⟨∇ u, ∇v⟩g d vol g, u, v ∈ D , (551) gives directly 

cK,h[ψ] = i (qK [ψ, hψ] − qK [hψ, ψ]) = 2 Re ⟨A∇h⟩ψ,where 

A∇h = −i



∇∇h + 12 ∆gh



. (552) For smooth h, multiplication by h preserves the Dirichlet form domain, so this identity extends from D to Dom (K) by graph-core density (similarly to the domain extension in Proposition 5.5). Here we take h = |V|2

> g

. For the special vector field V = ∇ϕ with ϕ = 12 dg(·, x⋆)2, one also has the exact identity 12 ∇| V|2 

> g

= V. (553) Indeed, |V|g = dg(x, x⋆) on the normal neighborhood, so 12 |V|2 

> g

= ϕ and taking a gradient gives (553). Thus we have A∇h = 2AV by linearity of both the covariant derivative and the divergence in the vector-field argument. Here we use symmetry of AV explicitly: it gives Re ⟨AV ⟩t = ⟨AV ⟩t, and hence 

cK,|V|2 

> g

[ψt] = 4⟨AV ⟩t. (554) Consequently, this part of (550) is 

λ2ct

mt

⟨AV ⟩t. (555) Since ˙mt = λctmt, the second term in (544) is −λ2ct⟨AV ⟩t/mt and exactly cancels (555). The first term is 

− λct

m2

> t

qK [ψt] = − λct

m2

> t
> Z
> Ω

|∇ ψt|2 

> g

d vol g, (556) 125 by (551). Finally, multiplying (527) by λct/(2m2 

> t

) gives the full commutator contribution 

λct

m2

> t
> Z
> Ω

Hess ϕ(∇ψt, ∇ψt) d vol g − λct

4m2

> t

⟨∆2

> g

ϕ⟩t + λct

2m2

> t

BK 

> ϕ

[ψt]. (557) Adding the last two displays leaves precisely 

λct

m2

> t
> Z
> Ω

(Hess ϕ − g)( ∇ψt, ∇ψt) d vol g − λct

4m2

> t

⟨∆2

> g

ϕ⟩t + λct

2m2

> t

BK 

> ϕ

[ψt], (558) Only now do we use the boundary sign: BK 

> ϕ

[ψt] ≤ 0 by (539). By the assumption Hess ϕ ⪯ g,the first term in (558) is also nonpositive. The second term is bounded above in absolute value by 

λct

4m2

> t

CM. (559) Combining this with (549) gives ˙Et ≤ ω2

> t



2 ˙ωt

ωt

− λct



⟨ f − f⋆⟩t + λct

4m2

> t

CM. (560) Under (540), the first term is nonpositive. Therefore ˙Et ≤ λct

4m2

> t

CM. (561) Finally, using ˙ mt/mt = λct, 

> Zt
> 0

λcs

m2

> s

ds = 

> Zt
> 0

˙ms

m3

> s

ds = 12

 1

m20

− 1

m2

> t



≤ 12m20

. (562) This proves (541). Since the potential part of Et is ω2 

> t

⟨ f − f⋆⟩t and the kinetic part is nonnega-tive, (542) follows. The convergence theorem itself does not fix a Hamiltonian-simulation model. For the schedule calculation, we assume the number of queries scales similarily to the quanties provided by The-orem 3.19 and 3.24, which are typical for interaction-picture based simulation [LW18]. Since the coefficient of f in (532) is ctmtω2 

> t

, the query count is, up to constant and polylogarithmic factors, 

Q f (T) = ∥ f ∥L∞ (Ω) 

> ZT
> 0

ctmtω2 

> t

dt (563) queries to a value oracle for f . This expression counts only potential-oracle queries. Costs for implementing the kinetic realization K, preparing the initial state, discretizing the manifold, and performing measurements are additional and are not included in (563). For fixed normalized ψ0, m0, and ω0, define the exact prefactor certified by Theorem 5.6 by 

BM(λ) := E0(λ) + CM

8m20

= qK [ψ0]

2m20

+ λ

m0

⟨AV ⟩0 + λ2

2 ⟨| V|2

> g

⟩0 + ω20 ⟨ f − f⋆⟩0 + CM

8m20

. (564) Thus (542) reads 

⟨ f − f⋆⟩t ≤ BM(λ)ω−2 

> t

. (565) 126 Proposition 5.7 (Optimal Riemannian QHD schedule) . Fix m 0, ω0, λ > 0 and the initial state ψ0.Among schedules satisfying (533) and (540) , the potential-oracle count (563) required to certify 

⟨ f − f⋆⟩T ≤ ϵ (566) 

through (565) is minimized by saturating the frequency-growth constraint. In operational time, the optimal path is m(s) = m0eλs, ω(s) = ω0eλs/2 . (567) 

A convenient constant-speed representative is ct = 1, mt = m0eλt, ωt = ω0eλt/2 . (568) 

If ϵ < BM(λ)/ω20, its stopping time and potential-oracle counts are Tϵ = 2

λ log 

pBM(λ)/ϵω0

!

, (569) 

Q f ,ϵ(λ)= ∥ f ∥L∞ (Ω)m0ω20

2λ

" BM(λ)

ϵω 20

2

− 1

#

. (570) 

Consequently, 

Q f ,ϵ(λ) = O ∥ f ∥L∞ (Ω)m0

λω 20

 BM(λ)

ϵ

2!

. (571) 

If instead ϵ ≥ BM(λ)/ω20, the initial state already satisfies the certified accuracy and one may take T ϵ = 0.Proof. Introduce operational time 

s(t) =  

> Zt
> 0

cu du, S = s(T). (572) Because ct > 0, it is a valid reparametrization. The schedule constraints become 

m(s) = m0eλs, dds log ω(s) ≤ λ

2 , (573) while the cost is 

Q f (S) = ∥ f ∥L∞ (Ω) 

> ZS
> 0

m(s)ω(s)2 ds. (574) Thus ct changes only the physical-time parametrization of an operational path. For the nontrivial accuracy regime, put 

ωϵ =

q

BM(λ)/ϵ > ω0. (575) Any admissible path that first reaches ωϵ at operational time S obeys, by integrating the second inequality in (573) backward, 

ω(s) ≥ ωϵe−λ(S−s)/2 , S ≥ 2

λ log ωϵ

ω0

. (576) 127 Substitution into (574) yields 

Q f (S) ≥ ∥ f ∥L∞ (Ω)m0ω2

> ϵ

2λ



eλS − e−λS

. (577) The right-hand side is strictly increasing in S. Its minimum is therefore attained at the smallest allowed operational time, and equality throughout requires (567). Integrating the cost along that path gives Z Sϵ

> 0

m0ω20 e2λs ds = m0ω20

2λ

" ωϵ

ω0

4

− 1

#

, (578) which proves (569) and (570). Any positive ct tracing the same operational path has the same potential-oracle count. The remaining scalar parameter λ can also be optimized. Write 

BM(λ) = aMλ2 + bMλ + qM, (579) where 

aM = 12 ⟨| V|2

> g

⟩0, bM = ⟨AV ⟩0

m0

, (580) 

qM = qK [ψ0]

2m20

+ ω20 ⟨ f − f⋆⟩0 + CM

8m20

. (581) If aM > 0 and qM > 0, the positive value minimizing the leading small-ϵ cost BM(λ)2/λ is 

λ⋆ =

q

b2 

> M

+ 12 aMqM − bM

6aM

. (582) Indeed, differentiating its logarithm gives 2 λB′

> M

(λ) = BM(λ), or 3 aMλ2 + bMλ − qM = 0, whose positive root is the displayed value. 

5.3.2 Riemannian QHD over the Sphere 

Let M = Sd be the unit round sphere. Fix x⋆ ∈ Sd and let 

r(x) = dSd (x, x⋆), ϕ(x) = 12 r(x)2.Assume 

Ω ⊂ BSd (x⋆, R), 0 < R < π,and that Ω is geodesically convex with smooth boundary. Away from x⋆, the spherical metric in geodesic polar coordinates is 

g = dr2 + sin 2 r g Sd−1 .For a radial function h(r),Hess (h) = h′′ (r) dr ⊗ dr + h′(r) cot r (g − dr ⊗ dr). (583) 128 Taking h(r) = 12 r2, so h′(r) = r and h′′ (r) = 1, gives Hess (ϕ) = dr ⊗ dr + r cot r (g − dr ⊗ dr). (584) For 0 < r < π, one has r cot r ≤ 1. Therefore Hess (ϕ) ⪯ g on BSd (x⋆, R). (585) At r = 0, the same conclusion follows by smooth extension. If Ω is geodesically convex and x⋆ ∈ Ω, then the outward star-shaped condition also holds: 

∂nϕ = ⟨∇ ϕ, n⟩g ≥ 0 on ∂Ω. (586) Indeed, the minimizing geodesic from a boundary point x to x⋆ points inward, so − log x (x⋆) = 

∇ϕ(x) has nonnegative pairing with the outward normal. For a radial function h(r) on Sd,

∆h = h′′ (r) + ( d − 1) cot r h ′(r). (587) Thus 

∆ϕ = 1 + ( d − 1)r cot r. (588) Let 

A(r) = r cot r csc 2 r − cot 2 r = cot r

sin 2 r

 r − sin r cos r. (589) We use the continuous extension A(0) = 2/3. A direct differentiation gives 

∆(r cot r) = −2 − (d − 3)A(r), (590) and hence 

∆2ϕ(r) = −(d − 1) [ 2 + ( d − 3)A(r)] . (591) Define the radius-only factor 

AR = max  

> 0≤r≤R

|A(r)|. (592) Then all dimension dependence of the biharmonic correction is explicit: 

∥∆2 

> Sd

ϕ∥L∞ (B(x⋆,R)) ≤ (d − 1) ( 2 + |d − 3|A R) . (593) In particular, the geometric error is OR(d2) as d → ∞. In the special dimension d = 3, the A(r)

term cancels exactly and ∆2ϕ = −4, independently of R.The factor AR itself admits the dimension-free elementary bound 

AR ≤



23

 R

sin R

2

, 0 < R ≤ π/2, max 

 π2

6 , R| cot R| csc 2 R + cot 2 R



, π/2 < R < π.(594) Indeed, the first bound follows from the calculation below. For π/2 ≤ r ≤ R, both | cot r| and csc 2 r are increasing, and the definition of A gives |A(r)| ≤ R| cot R| csc 2 R + cot 2 R.129 For R ≤ π/2, the identity 

r − sin r cos r = 

> Zr
> 0

2 sin 2 s ds ≤ 23 r3

and the inequality cot r ≤ 1/ r show that A(r) ≥ 0 and 

A(r) ≤ 23

 R

sin R

2

.Thus the simpler upper bound 

∥∆2 

> Sd

ϕ∥L∞ (B(x⋆,R)) ≤ (d − 1)

"

2 + 23 |d − 3|

 R

sin R

2#

(595) is available in an open hemisphere. Since R/ sin R ≤ π/2 there, the coarser dimension-only bound 

∥∆2 

> Sd

ϕ∥L∞ (B(x⋆,R)) ≤ (d − 1)



2 + π2

6 |d − 3|



(596) holds. Since V = ∇ϕ = r∂r and div V = ∆ϕ = 1 + ( d − 1)r cot r, the first-order multiplier in this specialization is 

Ar := AV = −i



r∂r + 12

1 + ( d − 1)r cot r

, (597) with its smooth extension at r = 0 understood. 

Theorem 5.8 (Spherical QHD convergence) . Let x ⋆ ∈ Ω ⊂ Sd, where Ω is a smooth geodesically convex domain contained in B (x⋆, R) with R < π.Let f be geodesically convex and in W 1, ∞(Ω), minimized at x ⋆. Let 

ψ0 ∈ Dom (−∆DSd ) = H2(Ω) ∩ H10 (Ω), ∥ψ0∥2 = 1, (598) 

and let ψt be the corresponding strong solution of i∂tψt = ct

−∆DSd

2mt

+ mtω2 

> t

f

!

ψt (599) 

with Dirichlet boundary conditions on ∂Ω. Assume that ψt has the trajectory regularity in (543) . If mt, ωt, ct ∈ C1([ 0, T]; R>0), ˙mt

mt

= λct, 2 ˙ωt

ωt

≤ λct,

then 

⟨ f − f (x⋆)⟩t ≤



E0 + (d − 1)( 2 + |d − 3|A R)

8m20



ω−2 

> t

, (600) 

where AR is the dimension-free quantity in (592) and 

E0 = ⟨p2⟩0

2m20

+ λ

m0

⟨Ar ⟩0 + λ2

2 ⟨r2⟩0 + ω20 ⟨ f − f (x⋆)⟩0, (601) 

Thus the explicit geometric additive error in (600) is O R(d2/m20). Equations (597) and (601) display the remaining dependence carried by the initial state. If the schedules or initial-state family vary with d, their dependence through m 0, ωt, and the displayed expectations must of course be included separately. 

130 Proof. For the Dirichlet realization KD = −∆DSd , elliptic regularity gives Dom (KD ) = H2(Ω) ∩

H10 (Ω). The graph-norm extension described after Proposition 5.5, together with (531), gives 

BKD 

> ϕ

[u] = −

Z

> ∂Ω

(∂nϕ)|∂nu|2 dSg ≤ 0, u ∈ Dom (KD ), (602) because geodesic convexity gives ∂nϕ ≥ 0. Thus the trajectory boundary condition (539) holds. The Hessian estimate (584) and the biharmonic bound (593) verify the remaining geometric hy-potheses of Theorem 5.6. Applying that theorem proves (600). 

Corollary 5.9 (Optimal schedule for spherical QHD) . Assume the potential-oracle model (563) . Define Cd,R := ( d − 1) ( 2 + |d − 3|A R) (603) 

and the spherical prefactor Bd,R(λ) := ⟨p2⟩0

2m20

+ λ

m0

⟨Ar ⟩0 + λ2

2 ⟨r2⟩0 + ω20 ⟨ f − f (x⋆)⟩0 + Cd,R

8m20

. (604) 

Then Proposition 5.7 applies with B M(λ) replaced by B d,R(λ). In particular, the constant-speed schedule is ct = 1, mt = m0eλt, ωt = ω0eλt/2 , (605) 

and, whenever ϵ < Bd,R(λ)/ω20,Tϵ = 2

λ log 

pBd,R(λ)/ϵω0

!

, Q f ,ϵ(λ)= ∥ f ∥L∞ (Ω)m0ω20

2λ

" Bd,R(λ)

ϵω 20

2

− 1

#

. (606) 

Moreover, Bd,R(λ) = ad,Rλ2 + bd,Rλ + qd,R, (607) 

where ad,R = 12 ⟨r2⟩0, bd,R = ⟨Ar ⟩0

m0

, qd,R = ⟨p2⟩0

2m20

+ ω20 ⟨ f − f (x⋆)⟩0 + Cd,R

8m20

. (608) 

If a d,R > 0 and q d,R > 0, the leading small-ϵ query count is minimized at 

λSd 

> ⋆

=

q

b2 

> d,R

+ 12 ad,Rqd,R − bd,R

6ad,R

. (609) 

Proof. For ϕ = r2/2, one has |V|2 

> g

= r2, qK [ψ0] = ⟨p2⟩0, and AV = Ar by (597). Equation (593) gives CM ≤ Cd,R. Substitution into (564), (570), and (582) proves every displayed formula. If the geometric term dominates for fixed R and fixed λ, then (571) gives 

Q f ,ϵ(λ) = OR

∥ f ∥L∞ (Ω)

λω 20 m30

d4

ϵ2

!

. (610) 131 More specifically, for an initial-state family satisfying 

ad,R = ΘR(1), bd,R = OR(d/m0), qd,R = ΘR(d2/m20), (611) one has λSd 

> ⋆

= ΘR(d/m0) and 

Q f ,ϵ(λSd 

> ⋆

) = OR

∥ f ∥L∞ (Ω)

m20ω20

d3

ϵ2

!

. (612) These dimension estimates concern only the potential-oracle model (563); they do not include kinetic, discretization, state-preparation, or measurement costs, nor any hidden dimension de-pendence of ∥ f ∥L∞ (Ω).

5.3.3 Riemannian QHD over the Simplex 

We now specialize the Riemannian theorem to the simplex using Laplace–Beltrami operator from Section 3.6: 

∆Sd =

> d

# ∑

> i,j=1

xi(δij − xj)∂i∂j + 12

> d

# ∑

> i=1

(1 − (d + 1)xi) ∂i (613) on L2(Sd, dvol g), where dvol g(x) = 

> d+1

# ∏

> i=1

x−1/2  

> i

dx1 · · · dxd.. (614) Its contravariant metric is 

gij 

> WF

(x) = xi(δij − xj), (615) or, intrinsically for ∑d+1 

> i=1

ξi = 0, 

|ξ|2 

> gWF

=

> d+1

# ∑

> i=1

ξ2

> i

xi

. (616) Let 

π : Sd 

> +

→ ∆d, π(y)i = y2 

> i

, Sd 

> +

= {y ∈ Sd : yi ≥ 0}. (617) Since d xi = 2yi dyi, the pullback metric and the associated distance are 

π∗ gWF = 4gSd , (618) 

dWF (x, z) = 2 arccos 

> d+1

# ∑

> i=1

√xizi

!

. (619) Let d Sd denote ordinary spherical area on Sd

> +

. The metric identity π∗ gWF = 4gSd implies 

π∗ dvol g = 2d dSd.Therefore 

(Uu )( y) := 2d/2 u(π(y)) (620) 132 is unitary from L2(∆d, dvol g) to L2(Sd

> +

, d Sd). The chain rule gives 

U∆Sd U−1 = 14 ∆Sd . (621) Let eΩ be a smooth geodesically convex domain compactly contained in the open spherical orthant Sd 

> ++

= {y ∈ Sd : yi > 0}, choose y⋆ ∈ eΩ, and put 

Ω = π( eΩ), x⋆ = π(y⋆), RΩ = sup  

> y∈eΩ

dSd (y, y⋆) < π

2 . (622) Fix R with RΩ < R ≤ π/2. Compact containment also gives the positive face margin 

ηΩ := min  

> y∈eΩ

min  

> 1≤i≤d+1

yi > 0. (623) We call f : Ω → R Fisher–Rao geodesically convex when its lift 

F(y) := f (π(y)) (624) is geodesically convex on eΩ. This is equivalent to geodesic convexity for gWF , because the constant factor in (618) changes lengths but not geodesic paths. 

Theorem 5.10 (QHD convergence on the Fisher–Rao simplex) . Let the domain, minimizer, and radius satisfy the preceding assumptions, and let f ∈ W1, ∞(Ω) be real, Fisher–Rao geodesically convex, and minimized at x ⋆. Let −∆Dg be the Dirichlet realization on Ω unitarily equivalent under U to −∆DSd /4 on 

eΩ. For normalized u 0 ∈ Dom (−∆Dg ), let u t be the corresponding strong solution of i∂tut = ct

−∆D

> Sd

2mt

+ mtω2 

> t

f

!

ut. (625) 

Assume that u t has the trajectory regularity in (543) . If 

˙mt

mt

= λct, 2 ˙ωt

ωt

≤ λct, (626) 

then 

⟨ f − f (x⋆)⟩t ≤ BWF  

> d,R

(λ)ω−2 

> t

, (627) 

where BWF  

> d,R

(λ) := ⟨− ∆Dg ⟩u0

2m20

+ λ

m0

⟨Ar ⟩Uu 0 + 2λ2⟨r2⟩Uu 0

+ ω20 ⟨ f − f (x⋆)⟩u0 + CWF 

> d,R

32 m20

, (628) 

CWF  

> d,R

:= ( d − 1) ( 2 + |d − 3|A R) . (629) 

Here r = dSd (·, y⋆), and A r is (597) centered at y ⋆.

133 Proof. Let 

ϕWF (x) = 12 dWF (x, x⋆)2, ϕS(y) = 12 r(y)2. (630) Equations (618) and (619) give 

ϕWF ◦ π = 4ϕS. (631) Because multiplication of a metric by a constant leaves its Levi–Civita connection unchanged, 

π∗ Hess WF ϕWF = 4 Hess Sd ϕS ⪯ 4gSd = π∗ gWF . (632) The lifted virial vector field is 

∇4gSd (4ϕS) = ∇gSd ϕS = r∂r, (633) and consequently 

U A ∇WF ϕWF U−1 = Ar, (634) 

|∇ WF ϕWF |2 

> gWF

◦ π = 4r2. (635) Moreover, (621) gives 

q−∆Dg [u0] = 14 ⟨p2 

> Sd

⟩Uu 0 , (636) 

∥∆2

> g

ϕWF ∥∞ = 14 ∥∆2 

> Sd

ϕS∥∞ ≤ 14 CWF  

> d,R

. (637) By the assumed Dirichlet unitary equivalence, U identifies the corresponding Dirichlet form domains. Applying the graph-core extension of (531) on eΩ gives the favorable boundary sign because eΩ is geodesically convex. Substituting (634)–(637) into Theorem 5.6 gives (627) and (628). 

Corollary 5.11 (Optimal schedule for simplex QHD) . Assume the potential-oracle model (563) , now with ∥ f ∥L∞ (Ω) and the Wright–Fisher Hamiltonian (625) . For fixed m 0, ω0, λ > 0 and u 0, the optimal operational path certified by Theorem 5.10 is m(s) = m0eλs, ω(s) = ω0eλs/2 . (638) 

A constant-speed representative is ct = 1, mt = m0eλt, ωt = ω0eλt/2 . (639) 

If ϵ < BWF  

> d,R

(λ)/ω20, then TWF  

> ϵ

= 2

λ log 

q

BWF  

> d,R

(λ)/ϵω0

 , (640) 

QWF   

> f,ϵ

(λ)= ∥ f ∥L∞ (Ω)m0ω20

2λ

 BWF  

> d,R

(λ)

ϵω 20

!2

− 1

 . (641) 134 Furthermore, BWF  

> d,R

(λ) = aWF λ2 + bWF λ + qWF , (642) 

where aWF = 2⟨r2⟩Uu 0 , bWF = ⟨Ar ⟩Uu 0

m0

, (643) 

qWF = ⟨− ∆Dg ⟩u0

2m20

+ ω20 ⟨ f − f (x⋆)⟩u0 + CWF 

> d,R

32 m20

. (644) 

If a WF > 0 and q WF > 0, the leading small-ϵ potential-oracle count is minimized at 

λWF  

> ⋆

=

q

b2WF + 12 aWF qWF − bWF 

6aWF 

. (645) 

Proof. Apply Proposition 5.7 with the prefactor BM(λ) replaced by BWF  

> d,R

(λ) from (628). Collecting its powers of λ gives (643)–(644), and (582) gives (645). For fixed R and fixed λ, if the geometric term dominates, then 

QWF   

> f,ϵ

(λ) = OR

∥ f ∥L∞ (Ω)

λω 20 m30

d4

ϵ2

!

. (646) If an initial-state family satisfies 

aWF = ΘR(1), bWF = OR(d/m0), qWF = ΘR(d2/m20), (647) then λWF  

> ⋆

= ΘR(d/m0) and 

QWF   

> f,ϵ

(λWF  

> ⋆

) = OR

∥ f ∥L∞ (Ω)

m20ω20

d3

ϵ2

!

. (648) These estimates count only potential-oracle queries. The implementation of −∆Dg , discretization, state preparation, and measurement are additional; in particular, coordinate-based implementa-tion bounds may depend on the face margin η−1 

> Ω

.

5.4 Real-Space Adiabatic Algorithm on ℓp Balls 

Recently, Herman et al. [Her+25] introduced Real-Space Adiabatic Algorithm (RSAA), which is a dig-ital implementation of the quantum adiabatic algorithm to prepare the ground state of Schr ¨ odinger operators. Their algorithm uses the Dirichlet Laplacian as the kinetic operator and evolves the Hamiltonian in Euclidean space according to a sufficiently slow schedule. We extend this algo-rithm to a Riemannian manifolds by replacing the Euclidean Laplacian with the Laplace–Beltrami operator corresponding to the underlying metric g.While RsAA can be seen as more general ground state preparation algorithm, we will consider optimization problems. Let (M, g) be a compact connected Riemannian manifold, and let f :

M → R be a continuous potential function. Without loss of generality we can assume min M f = 0135 since shifting the potential by a constant only changes the evolution by a global phase. Let F be the operator 

(Fψ)( x) := f (x)ψ(x)

on L2(M).Fix an initial parameter λmin > 0 and a final parameter λmax > 0 and choose a twice con-tinuously differentiable, nondecreasing schedule α : [0, 1 ] → [λ2min , λ2max ] with α(0) = λ2min and 

α(1) = λ2max . Define the self-adjoint Hamiltonian 

Hg(s) := −∆g + α(s)F, 0 ≤ s ≤ 1. (649) The goal is to prepare the ground state of this Hamiltonian at s = 1 so that measurement yields a point ex ∈ M such that 

f (ex) − min  

> M

f ≤ ϵ,for some small ϵ > 0 with high probability. The algorithm then sets the parameters λ2min and λ2max so that preparation of the ground state at s = 0 is trivial and the ground state at s = 1 is sufficiently concentrated around the optimum. The evolution from s = 0 to s = 1 is then determined by the schedule α. The adiabatic theorem allows one to derive a simple schedule. Let E0(s) and E1(s) be its two lowest eigenvalues, counted with multiplicity, and define 

γ(s) := E1(s) − E0(s), γmin := min  

> s∈[0,1 ]

γ(s). (650) Assume that γmin > 0. Choose a normalized ground state ϕ0(s) satisfying 

Hg(s)ϕ0(s) = E0(s)ϕ0(s), ∥ϕ0(s)∥ = 1. 

Theorem 5.12 (Adiabatic theorem) . Suppose γmin > 0. Define 

Ag := ∂s Hg(0) + ∂s Hg(1)

γ2min 

+ 

> Z10

∂2 

> s

Hg(s)

γ2min 

+ ∂s Hg(s) 2

γ3min 

!

ds. (651) 

For T > 0, let ψ(t) solve i∂tψ(t) = Hg(t/T)ψ(t), ψ(0) = ϕ0(0), 0 ≤ t ≤ T.

There is a universal constant C ad > 0 and a phase ϑT ∈ R such that 

ψ(T) − eiϑT ϕ0(1) ≤ Cad Ag

T . (652) 

Proof. Set 

Hg(s) := Hg(s) − E0(s)I.The scalar shift changes the evolution only by a phase. Since ∂s Hg(s) = α′(s)F is bounded, the Hellmann–Feynman theorem gives ∂s Hg(s) ≤ 2 ∂s Hg(s) . Thus the relative-bound hypothe-sis of Theorem 1 of [ML23] holds with c0(s) = 4 ∂s Hg(s) 2 and c1(s) = 0. Applying that theorem with 2 ∆(s) = γ(s), proves (652). 136 For the RSAA schedule in (649), 

∂s Hg(s) = α′(s)F, ∂2 

> s

Hg(s) = α′′ (s)F, ∥F∥ = ∥ f ∥∞ .Thus (651) is determined by γmin , the schedule α, and ∥ f ∥∞.We now give an explicit digital implementation of the RSAA algorithm on ℓp ball. The other manifolds can be treated similarly by applying appropriate simulation results in previous sections with the appropriate boundary conditions and metrics. For simplicity, we assume periodic boundary conditions, however our result can be general-ized to Dirichlet boundary conditions by smoothly reflecting the function across the boundary. Since the Hamiltonian preserves the odd subspace, restricting this evolution to one odd sector recovers Dirichlet evolution. Let M = Ωball  

> p,δ

be the projected Duffy domain from Section 3.4, equipped with the flat Duffy metric and periodic boundary conditions. Then −∆g = −∆per  

> Ω

and the Riemannian volume mea-sure is d μ = dμball  

> p,δ

.

Algorithm 3 Digital Implementation of RSAA optimization on an ℓp ball 

Input: Parameters p ≥ 2 and 0 < δ < 1, a potential oracle for f , a schedule α, an evolution time 

T, and a quadrature degree Q chosen according to Corollary 3.13. 1. Set Mgrid = 2Q + 1 and prepare the sampled initial state 

|Ψ(0)⟩ =

 2rδ

Mgrid 

d/2 

# ∑  

> uj∈G bDp,Q

ϕ0(0, uj) |j⟩ .2. Perform the finite-dimensional evolution in Corollary 3.13 with 

a(t) = 1, b(t) = α(t/T), 0 ≤ t ≤ T.3. Measure the grid register and return the corresponding point ex ∈ M .

Output: The point ex.

Theorem 5.13 (Optimization via RSAA on ℓp ball) . Let p ≥ 2 and 0 < δ < 1. Assume that f is Gf -Lipschitz in ambient Euclidean distance, that f ◦ bDp has matching values on opposite faces of C δ, and that ϕ0(0) ∈ V Ω 

> L0

. Let 0 < η ≤ 1, let 0 < γ ≤ γmin , choose Λ f ≥ ∥ f ∥∞, and let ϵ > 0. Define Sρ := {x ∈ M : f (x) ≤ ρ} and suppose that 

> Z
> Sϵ/2

|ϕ0(1, x)|2 dμ(x) ≥ 1 − η

3 . (653) 

There are choices of T and Q for which Algorithm 3 returns ex ∈ Sϵ with probability at least 1 − η. The algorithm uses O(d log (2Q + 1)) qubits. Proof. Choose 

T = C

η

 (2 ∥α′∥∞ + ∥α′′ ∥∞)Λ f

γ2 + ∥α′∥2 

> ∞

Λ2

> f

γ3

 ,137 where C ≥ 3Cad . Then Cad Ag/T ≤ η/3. If Sϵ = M, the claim is immediate. Otherwise ∥hϵ∥∞ = 1 for 

hϵ(x) := min 



1, 2

ϵ



f (x) − ϵ

2



> +



.This function vanishes on Sϵ/2 , equals one on M \ Sϵ, is 2 Gf /ϵ-Lipschitz, and has matching values on opposite faces. The concentration assumption therefore implies 

⟨ϕ0(1), hϵϕ0(1)⟩ ≤ η

3 .Theorem 5.12 and the choice of T imply, for some phase ϑ,

ψ(T) − eiϑϕ0(1) ≤ η

3 .For 0 ≤ hϵ ≤ 1, the difference between its expectations in two pure states is at most their trace distance, which is at most their phase-adjusted vector distance. Its expectation in the exact final state is therefore at most 2 η/3. Set ϵdisc = η/12 and α = R 10 α(s) ds. Choose Q from Corollary 3.13 with 

L0, B1 = αT, Gh ≤ 2Gf

ϵ , ϵ = ϵdisc .Equivalently, Mgrid = 2Q + 1 may be chosen as 

O L0 +

"

1 + 24 rδκp,δ

√d

η max 



Gf αT, 2Gf

ϵ

# 

1 + αTΛ f + log 

 12 

η

 !

.Corollary 3.13 changes the expectation of hϵ by at most 4 ϵdisc = η/3. Hence the grid expectation of hϵ is at most η. Since hϵ = 1 outside Sϵ, the probability of returning a point outside Sϵ is at most 

η.The authors in [Her+25] gave a concrete class of non-convex objective functions for which the runtime of RsAA algorithm is polynomial. Let {I i}ki=1 partition [d] and define 

fsep (y) :=

> k

# ∑

> i=1

gi(yIi ), b := max  

> i

|I i|. (654) For R ∈ SO (d) and B > 0, define the rotated and rescaled box objective 

fbox (x) := fsep 

 Brδ

Rx 



, x ∈ Cδ, (655) where B is chosen so that the relevant minimizer is mapped into Cδ. The rotation hides the separa-ble coordinates from classical algorithms [LZW23; Her+25]. The corresponding objective on Ωball 

> p,δ

is 

fp,δ := fbox ◦ bD−1 

> p

.138 If fbox has matching values on opposite faces of Cδ, then fp,δ satisfies the periodic compatibility condition in Theorem 5.13. To compare the adiabatic evolutions, define 

Hbox (s) := −∆per  

> Cδ

+ α(s) fbox ,

Hp,δ(s) := −∆per  

> Dp

+ α(s) fp,δ.The definition of −∆per  

> Dp

in (104) and the identity fp,δ ◦ bDp = fbox give 

Up,δ Hp,δ(s)U† 

> p,δ

= Hbox (s).Thus the two Hamiltonians have the same spectrum and the same spectral gap for every s ∈ [0, 1 ].Under the assumptions for rotated block-separable objectives in [Her+25, Theorem 3.6], Herman et al. show that this gap is inverse polynomial along the adiabatic path. The adiabatic runtime for Hbox (s) is therefore polynomial, and the same conclusion holds for its Duffy lift Hp,δ(s). For known black-box optimization algorithms, the runtime is exponential for optimizing the same class of functions. 

# AI Use Disclosure 

Large language model tools were used interactively at all stages of the preparation of this manuscript: from the earliest exploratory research stages to the final exposition and writing steps. The final manuscript was substantially revised by the authors, who remain solely responsible for all math-ematical claims, proofs, references, and conclusions. Most of the provable statements began as ideas from the author and GPT-5.6 Sol made substantial contributions to the analysis. GPT-5.6 Sol also generated some new ideas, notably, it suggested the use of the IMS Localization in the coherent-charts method. 

# Acknowledgment 

We thank Rob Otter and Ruslan Shaydulin for executive support and valuable feedback on this project. We also acknowledge our colleagues at the Global Technology Applied Research Center of JPMorganChase. 

# Disclaimer 

This paper was prepared for informational purposes by the Global Technology Applied Research center of JPMorgan Chase & Co. This paper is not a product of the Research Department of JPMor-gan Chase & Co. or its affiliates. Neither JPMorgan Chase & Co. nor any of its affiliates makes any explicit or implied representation or warranty and none of them accept any liability in connection with this paper, including, without limitation, with respect to the completeness, accuracy, or reli-ability of the information contained herein and the potential legal, compliance, tax, or accounting effects thereof. This document is not intended as investment research or investment advice, or as a recommendation, offer, or solicitation for the purchase or sale of any security, financial instrument, 139 financial product or service, or to be used in any way for evaluating the merits of participating in any transaction. 

# References 

[AH16] Jacob Abernethy and Elad Hazan. “Faster convex optimization: Simulated annealing with an efficient universal barrier”. In: International Conference on Machine Learning .PMLR. 2016, pp. 2520–2528 (cit. on p. 4). [Ale+19] Andrei Alexandru, Paulo F Bedaque, Henry Lamm, Scott Lawrence, and (NuQS Collaboration). “ σ models on quantum computers”. In: Physical Review Letters 123.9 (2019), p. 090501 (cit. on pp. 4, 12, 106). [Ama98] Shun-ichi Amari. “Natural Gradient Works Efficiently in Learning”. In: Neural Com-putation 10.2 (1998), pp. 251–276. DOI : 10.1162/089976698300017746 (cit. on p. 4). [AN26] Yoshihiko Abe and Ryo Nagai. “Quantum Riemannian Hamiltonian Descent”. In: 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.28624 (2026) (cit. on pp. 13, 115). [Aug+23a] Brandon Augustino, Jiaqi Leng, Giacomo Nannicini, Tam´ as Terlaky, and Xiaodi Wu. “A quantum central path algorithm for linear optimization”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.03977 

(2023) (cit. on p. 3). [Aug+23b] Brandon Augustino, Giacomo Nannicini, Tam´ as Terlaky, and Luis F. Zuluaga. “Quan-tum Interior Point Methods for Semidefinite Optimization”. In: Quantum 7 (2023), p. 1110 (cit. on p. 114). [Bab+19] Ryan Babbush, Dominic W. Berry, Jarrod R. McClean, and Hartmut Neven. “Quan-tum simulation of chemistry with sublinear scaling in basis size”. In: npj Quantum Information 5 (2019), p. 92. DOI : 10.1038/s41534-019-0199-y (cit. on p. 12). [Ba ˜ n+20] Mari Carmen Ba ˜ nuls, Rainer Blatt, Jacopo Catani, Alessio Celi, Juan Ignacio Cirac, Marcello Dalmonte, Leonardo Fallani, Karl Jansen, Maciej Lewenstein, Simone Mon-tangero, et al. “Simulating lattice gauge theories within quantum technologies”. In: 

The European physical journal D 74.8 (2020), p. 165 (cit. on pp. 4, 12, 110). [BCK15] Dominic W. Berry, Andrew M. Childs, and Robin Kothari. “Hamiltonian Simulation with Nearly Optimal Dependence on all Parameters”. In: Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE 56th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS) . FOCS ’15. USA: IEEE Computer Society, 2015, pp. 792–809. ISBN : 9781467381918. DOI : 10.1109/FOCS. 2015.54 . URL : https://doi.org/10.1109/FOCS.2015.54 (cit. on p. 3). [Ber+20] Dominic W. Berry, Andrew M. Childs, Yuan Su, Xin Wang, and Nathan Wiebe. “Time-dependent Hamiltonian simulation with L1-norm scaling”. In: Quantum 4 (2020), p. 254 (cit. on pp. 32, 56, 66). [BK22] Riley Badenbroek and Etienne de Klerk. “Simulated annealing for convex optimiza-tion: rigorous complexity analysis and practical perspectives”. In: Journal of Optimiza-tion Theory and Applications 194.2 (2022), pp. 465–491 (cit. on p. 4). [Bou23] Nicolas Boumal. An introduction to optimization on smooth manifolds . Cambridge Uni-versity Press, 2023 (cit. on p. 4). 140 [BT03] Amir Beck and Marc Teboulle. “Mirror descent and nonlinear projected subgradient methods for convex optimization”. In: Operations Research Letters 31.3 (2003), pp. 167– 175. DOI : 10.1016/S0167-6377(02)00231-6 (cit. on p. 4). [Bub15] S´ ebastien Bubeck. “Convex optimization: Algorithms and complexity”. In: Founda-tions and Trends® in Machine Learning 8.3-4 (2015), pp. 231–357 (cit. on pp. 4, 15). [Bur00] Cliff Peter Burgess. “Goldstone and pseudo-Goldstone bosons in nuclear, particle and condensed-matter physics”. In: Physics Reports 330.4 (2000), pp. 193–261 (cit. on pp. 4, 106). [Cha+26] Shouvanik Chakrabarti, Dylan Herman, Jacob Watkins, Enrico Fontana, Brandon Au-gustino, Junhyung Lyle Kim, and Marco Pistoia. “Provable Speedups in Convex Op-timization via Quantum Dynamics”. In: 21st Conference on the Theory of Quantum Com-putation, Communication and Cryptography (TQC 2026) . Vol. 389. Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs). Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum f ¨ ur Infor-matik, 2026, 4:1–4:25. DOI : 10 . 4230 / LIPIcs . TQC . 2026 . 4 . URL : https : / / drops . dagstuhl.de/entities/document/10.4230/LIPIcs.TQC.2026.4 (cit. on pp. 3, 4, 8, 12, 15, 16, 19, 24, 28, 30, 34, 99). [Che+25] Zherui Chen, Yuchen Lu, Hao Wang, Yizhou Liu, and Tongyang Li. “Quantum Langevin dynamics for optimization”. In: Communications in Mathematical Physics 406.3 (2025), p. 52 (cit. on p. 3). [Chi+21] Andrew M. Childs, Yuan Su, Minh C. Tran, Nathan Wiebe, and Shuchen Zhu. “The-ory of trotter error with commutator scaling”. In: Physical Review X 11.1 (2021), p. 011020 (cit. on p. 3). [Chi+22] Andrew M. Childs, Jiaqi Leng, Tongyang Li, Jin-Peng Liu, and Chenyi Zhang. “Quan-tum simulation of real-space dynamics”. In: Quantum 6 (2022), p. 860 (cit. on pp. 3, 12, 15, 19, 24). [CHN89] Sudip Chakravarty, Bertrand I Halperin, and David R Nelson. “Two-dimensional quantum Heisenberg antiferromagnet at low temperatures”. In: Physical Review B 

39.4 (1989), p. 2344 (cit. on p. 106). [Cos81a] R. C. T. da Costa. “Quantum mechanics of a constrained particle”. In: Physical Review A 23.4 (1981), pp. 1982–1987. DOI : 10.1103/PhysRevA.23.1982 (cit. on p. 4). [Cos81b] RCT607422 da Costa. “Quantum mechanics of a constrained particle”. In: Physical Review A 23.4 (1981), p. 1982 (cit. on p. 105). [Cre77] Michael Creutz. “Gauge fixing, the transfer matrix, and confinement on a lattice”. In: 

Phys. Rev. D 15 (4 Feb. 1977), pp. 1128–1136. DOI : 10.1103/PhysRevD.15.1128 . URL :

https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevD.15.1128 (cit. on p. 111). [CSW25] Ahmet Burak Catli, Sophia Simon, and Nathan Wiebe. “Exponentially Better Bounds for Quantum Optimization via Dynamical Simulation”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.04285 

(2025) (cit. on p. 3). [CW12] Andrew M. Childs and Nathan Wiebe. “Hamiltonian Simulation using linear com-binations of unitary operations”. In: Quantum Information and Computation 12.11–12 (Nov. 2012), pp. 901–924. ISSN : 1533-7146 (cit. on p. 3). 141 [DeW57] Bryce S DeWitt. “Dynamical theory in curved spaces. I. A review of the classical and quantum action principles”. In: Reviews of modern physics 29.3 (1957), p. 377 (cit. on pp. 4, 105, 108). [dLD78] A d’Adda, M L ¨ uscher, and P Di Vecchia. “A 1/ n expandable series of non-linear sigma models with instantons”. In: Nuclear Physics B 146.1 (1978), pp. 63–76 (cit. on pp. 4, 108). [Eck+89] Gerhard Ecker, J ¨ urg Gasser, Antonio Pich, and Eduardo De Rafael. “The role of reso-nances in chiral perturbation theory”. In: Nuclear Physics B 321.2 (1989), pp. 311–342 (cit. on p. 106). [Eic78] H Eichenherr. “SU (N) invariant non-linear σ models”. In: Nuclear Physics B 146.1 (1978), pp. 215–223 (cit. on pp. 4, 108). [Fey81] Richard P. Feynman. “Simulating physics with computers”. In: International Journal of Theoretical Physics 21.467–488 (1981) (cit. on p. 3). [Fol99] Gerald B Folland. Real analysis: modern techniques and their applications . John Wiley & Sons, 1999 (cit. on p. 14). [GC11] Mark Girolami and Ben Calderhead. “Riemann Manifold Langevin and Hamiltonian Monte Carlo Methods”. In: Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology) 73.2 (2011), pp. 123–214. DOI : 10.1111/j.1467- 9868.2010.00765.x 

(cit. on p. 4). [Gil+19] Andr´ as Gily´ en, Yuan Su, Guang Hao Low, and Nathan Wiebe. “Quantum singular value transformation and beyond: exponential improvements for quantum matrix arithmetics”. In: Proceedings of the 51st Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing . Ed. by Moses Charikar and Edith Cohen. 2019, pp. 193–204 (cit. on p. 3). [GL60] Murray Gell-Mann and Maurice L´ evy. “The axial vector current in beta decay”. In: Il Nuovo Cimento (1955-1965) 16.4 (1960), pp. 705–726 (cit. on p. 106). [Gri+25] Sander Gribling, Simon Apers, Harold Nieuwboer, and Michael Walter. Self-concordant Schr¨ odinger operators: spectral gaps and optimization without condition numbers . 2025. arXiv: 2510 . 06115 [quant-ph] . URL : https : / / arxiv . org / abs / 2510 . 06115 (cit. on pp. 3, 5, 11, 13, 68, 114). [Hal83] F Duncan M Haldane. “Nonlinear field theory of large-spin Heisenberg antiferro-magnets: Semiclassically quantized solitons of the one-dimensional easy-axis N´ eel state”. In: Physical review letters 50.15 (1983), p. 1153 (cit. on p. 106). [Ham08] Herbert W Hamber. Quantum gravitation: The Feynman path integral approach . Springer Science & Business Media, 2008 (cit. on p. 111). [Her+25] Dylan Herman, Guneykan Ozgul, Anuj Apte, Junhyung Lyle Kim, Anupam Prakash, Jiayu Shen, and Shouvanik Chakrabarti. Mechanisms for Quantum Advantage in Global Optimization of Nonconvex Functions . 2025. arXiv: 2510.03385 [quant-ph] . URL : https: //arxiv.org/abs/2510.03385 (cit. on pp. 3, 4, 12, 68, 135, 138, 139). [Jai+26] Siddhartha Jain, Vishnu Iyer, Rolando D Somma, Ning Bao, and Stephen Jordan. “Efficient quantum Hermite transform”. In: Proceedings of the 58th Annual ACM Sym-posium on Theory of Computing . 2026, pp. 541–552 (cit. on p. 20). 142 [Kas+08] Ivan Kassal, Stephen P. Jordan, Peter J. Love, Masoud Mohseni, and Al´ an Aspuru-Guzik. “Polynomial-time quantum algorithm for the simulation of chemical dynam-ics”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 105.48 (2008), pp. 18681–18686. 

> DOI

: 10.1073/pnas.0808245105 (cit. on p. 12). [Kiv+17] Ian D Kivlichan, Nathan Wiebe, Ryan Babbush, and Al´ an Aspuru-Guzik. “Bounding the costs of quantum simulation of many-body physics in real space”. In: Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and Theoretical 50.30 (2017), p. 305301 (cit. on pp. 3, 12). [Koo+22] Yunbum Kook, Yin Tat Lee, Ruoqi Shen, and Santosh S. Vempala. “Sampling with Riemannian Hamiltonian Monte Carlo in a Constrained Space”. In: Advances in Neu-ral Information Processing Systems . Vol. 35. 2022, pp. 31684–31696. URL : https : / / arxiv.org/abs/2202.01908 (cit. on p. 4). [KP18] Iordanis Kerenidis and Anupam Prakash. “A quantum interior point method for LPs and SDPs”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.09266 (2018) (cit. on p. 114). [KS75] John Kogut and Leonard Susskind. “Hamiltonian formulation of Wilson’s lattice gauge theories”. In: Physical Review D 11.2 (1975), p. 395 (cit. on pp. 4, 110, 111). [LC17] Guang Hao Low and Isaac L. Chuang. “Optimal Hamiltonian Simulation by Quan-tum Signal Processing”. In: Physical Review Letters 118.1 (2017), p. 010501. DOI : 10. 1103/PhysRevLett.118.010501 (cit. on p. 3). [LC19] Guang Hao Low and Isaac L. Chuang. “Hamiltonian simulation by qubitization”. In: 

Quantum 3 (2019), p. 163 (cit. on p. 3). [Lee18] John M Lee. Introduction to Riemannian manifolds . Vol. 2. Springer, 2018 (cit. on p. 13). [Len+23] Jiaqi Leng, Ethan Hickman, Joseph Li, and Xiaodi Wu. Quantum Hamiltonian Descent .2023. arXiv: 2303.01471 [quant-ph] . URL : https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.01471 

(cit. on pp. 3, 11, 115). [Len+25a] Jiaqi Leng, Kewen Wu, Xiaodi Wu, and Yufan Zheng. “(Sub) Exponential Quantum Speedup for Optimization”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.14841 (2025) (cit. on pp. 3, 4). [Len+25b] Jiaqi Leng, Yufan Zheng, Zhiyuan Jia, Chaoyue Zhao, Yuxiang Peng, and Xiaodi Wu. 

Quantum Hamiltonian Descent for Non-smooth Optimization” . 2025. arXiv: 2503.15878 [math.OC] . URL : https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.15878 (cit. on p. 3). [LFH25] Mingze Li, Lei Fan, and Zhu Han. Quantum Hamiltonian Descent based Augmented La-grangian Method for Constrained Nonconvex Nonlinear Optimization . 2025. arXiv: 2508. 02969 (cit. on p. 13). [Liu+26] Chenxu Liu, Meng Wang, Mingze Li, Muqing Zheng, Samuel Stein, and Yousu Chen. 

Encoding Choices and Fault-Tolerant Resource Estimates for Digital Quantum Hamiltonian Descent . 2026. arXiv: 2607.16996 (cit. on p. 12). [Llo96] Seth Lloyd. “Universal quantum simulators”. In: Science 273.5278 (1996), pp. 1073– 1078 (cit. on p. 3). [LS25] Jiaqi Leng and Bin Shi. Quantum Optimization via Gradient-Based Hamiltonian Descent .To appear in ICML 2025. 2025. arXiv: 2505.14670 (cit. on p. 12). 143 [LSL23] Yizhou Liu, Weijie J. Su, and Tongyang Li. “On Quantum Speedups for Nonconvex Optimization via Quantum Tunneling Walks”. In: Quantum 7 (June 2023), p. 1030. 

> ISSN

: 2521-327X. DOI : 10.22331/q-2023-06-02-1030 . URL : http://dx.doi.org/ 10.22331/q-2023-06-02-1030 (cit. on p. 3). [LV18] Yin Tat Lee and Santosh S. Vempala. “Convergence Rate of Riemannian Hamiltonian Monte Carlo and Faster Polytope Volume Computation”. In: Proceedings of the 50th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing . ACM, 2018, pp. 1115–1121. 

> DOI

: 10.1145/3188745.3188774 (cit. on p. 4). [LV22] Yin Tat Lee and Santosh S. Vempala. “Geodesic Walks in Polytopes”. In: SIAM Journal on Computing 51.2 (2022), STOC17-400–STOC17-488. DOI : 10.1137/17M1145999 (cit. on p. 4). [LW18] Guang Hao Low and Nathan Wiebe. “Hamiltonian simulation in the interaction pic-ture”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.00675 (2018) (cit. on pp. 19, 32, 56, 66, 82, 126). [LZW23] Jiaqi Leng, Yufan Zheng, and Xiaodi Wu. “A quantum-classical performance sepa-ration in nonconvex optimization”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.00811 (2023) (cit. on pp. 3, 138). [Mey02] Henning Meyer. “The molecular hamiltonian”. In: Annual review of physical chemistry 

53.1 (2002), pp. 141–172 (cit. on p. 105). [ML23] Evgeny Mozgunov and Daniel A. Lidar. “Quantum adiabatic theorem for unbounded Hamiltonians with a cutoff and its application to superconducting circuits”. In: Philo-sophical Transactions of the Royal Society A 381.2241 (2023), p. 20210407 (cit. on p. 136). [NN88] Yurii E. Nesterov and Arkadi Nemirovskii. “A general approach to polynomial-time algorithms design for convex programming”. In: Report, Central Economical and Math-ematical Institute, USSR Academy of Sciences, Moscow (1988) (cit. on p. 114). [NN94] Yurii E. Nesterov and Arkadi Nemirovskii. Interior-Point Polynomial Algorithms in Convex Programming . Vol. 13. SIAM, 1994 (cit. on pp. 4, 114). [NY83] Arkadi Semenoviˇ c Nemirovskii and David Borisovich Yudin. “Problem complexity and method efficiency in optimization”. In: (1983) (cit. on p. 4). [Pen+25] Sirui Peng, Shengminjie Chen, Xiaoming Sun, and Hongyi Zhou. Stochastic Quantum Hamiltonian Descent . 2025. arXiv: 2507.15424 (cit. on p. 12). [Ren01] James Renegar. A mathematical view of interior-point methods in convex optimization .SIAM, 2001 (cit. on pp. 4, 114). [Ros97] Steven Rosenberg. The Laplacian on a Riemannian manifold: an introduction to analysis on manifolds . 31. Cambridge University Press, 1997 (cit. on p. 14). [SBR17] Luiz CB da Silva, Cristiano C Bastos, and F´ abio G Ribeiro. “Quantum mechanics of a constrained particle and the problem of prescribed geometry-induced potential”. In: 

Annals of Physics 379 (2017), pp. 13–33 (cit. on p. 105). [SC19] Hersh Singh and Shailesh Chandrasekharan. “Qubit regularization of the O (3) sigma model”. In: Physical Review D 100.5 (2019), p. 054505 (cit. on pp. 12, 106). 144 [She+22] Jiayu Shen, Di Luo, Chenxi Huang, Bryan K Clark, Aida X El-Khadra, Bryce Gadway, and Patrick Draper. “Simulating quantum mechanics with a θ-term and an’t Hooft anomaly on a synthetic dimension”. In: Physical Review D 105.7 (2022), p. 074505 (cit. on p. 105). [Sin22] Hersh Singh. “Qubit regularized O (N) nonlinear sigma models”. In: Physical Review D 105.11 (2022), p. 114509 (cit. on pp. 4, 12, 106). [SM05] Ralf Sch ¨ utzhold and Sarah Mostame. “Quantum simulator for the O (3) nonlinear sigma model”. In: Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Physics Letters 82.5 (2005), pp. 248–252 (cit. on pp. 12, 106). [Sol74] A Solecki. “Finite atlases on manifolds”. In: Commentationes Mathematicae 17.2 (1974) (cit. on p. 13). [Su+21] Yuan Su, Dominic W. Berry, Nathan Wiebe, Nicholas Rubin, and Ryan Babbush. “Fault-Tolerant Quantum Simulations of Chemistry in First Quantization”. In: PRX Quantum 2 (2021), p. 040332. DOI : 10.1103/PRXQuantum.2.040332 (cit. on p. 12). [TS24] Andrea Tononi and Luca Salasnich. “Shell-shaped atomic gases”. In: Physics Reports 

1072 (2024), pp. 1–48 (cit. on p. 105). [Wie96] Stephen Wiesner. Simulations of Many-Body Quantum Systems by a Quantum Computer .1996. arXiv: quant-ph/9603028 (cit. on p. 12). [Wil74] Kenneth G Wilson. “Confinement of quarks”. In: Physical review D 10.8 (1974), p. 2445 (cit. on p. 110). [Wit79] Edward Witten. “Instantons, the quark model, and the 1/ N expansion”. In: Nuclear Physics B 149.2 (1979), pp. 285–320 (cit. on p. 108). [Wu+26] Zeguan Wu, Mingze Li, Muqing Zheng, Meng Wang, Junyu Liu, Samuel Stein, Ang Li, Yousu Chen, and Chenxu Liu. Benchmarking and Resource Analysis for Augmented-Lagrangian Quantum Hamiltonian Descent . 2026. arXiv: 2605.12066 (cit. on p. 13). [Zal98] Christof Zalka. “Simulating quantum systems on a quantum computer”. In: Proceed-ings of the Royal Society of London. Series A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sci-ences 454.1969 (1998), pp. 313–322. DOI : 10.1098/rspa.1998.0162 (cit. on p. 12). [ZS16] Hongyi Zhang and Suvrit Sra. “First-order Methods for Geodesically Convex Opti-mization”. In: 29th Annual Conference on Learning Theory . Vol. 49. Proceedings of Ma-chine Learning Research. PMLR, 2016, pp. 1617–1638. URL : https://proceedings. mlr.press/v49/zhang16b.html (cit. on p. 4). 145